<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>In the midst of all the attentions paid him by his neighbours and the visitors who followed each other day by day, there was one duty which John Erskine had to fulfil, and which made a break in the tide of circumstances which seemed to be drifting him towards the family at Lindores, and engaging him more and more to follow their fortunes. When a life is as yet undecided and capable of turning in a new direction, it is common enough, in fact as well as in allegory, that a second path should be visible, branching off from the first, into which the unconscious feet of the wayfarer might still turn, were the dangers of the more attractive way divined. There is always one unobtrusive turning which leads to the safe track; but how is the traveller to know that, whose soul is all unconscious of special importance in the immediate step it takes? John Erskine contemplated his rapprochement to the Lindores with the greatest complacency and calm. That it could contain any dangers, he neither knew nor would have believed: he wanted nothing better than to be identified with them, to take up their cause and be known as their partisan. Nevertheless Providence silently, without giving him any warning, opened up the other path to him, and allowed him in ignorance to choose. If he had known, probably it would not have made the least difference. Young heroes have never in any known history obeyed the dictates of any monitor, either audible or inaudible, who warned them against one connection and in favour of another. Nevertheless he had his chance, as shall be seen. The morning after his first dinner at the Castle, which had been the reopening of a delightful world to him, he decided that he had put off too long his visit to his only relative, and set off through the soft May sunshine, for it was beautiful weather, to pay his respects to his old aunt at Dunearn.</p>
			<p>The house of Miss Barbara Erskine at Dunearn opened direct from the street. It was one of the same class of homely Scotch houses to which Dalrulzian itself belonged; but whereas Dalrulzian, being a mansion-house, had two gables, Miss Barbara’s Lodging, as she liked it to be called, had but one, stepping out into the broad pathway, not paved, but composed of sand and gravel, which ran along one side of the South Street. This gable was broad enough to give considerable size to the drawing-room which filled the upper story, and which had windows every way, commanding the street and all that went on in it, which was not much. The house was entered by an outside stair, which gave admission to the first floor, on which all the rooms of “the family” were, the floor below being devoted to the uses of the servants, with the single exception of the dining-parlour, which was situated near the kitchen for the convenience of the household. Behind there was a large fragrant old-fashioned garden full of sweet-smelling flowers, interspersed with fruit-trees, and going off into vegetables at the lower end. Notwithstanding that it was so far north, there were few things that would not grow in this garden, and it was a wilderness of roses in their season. Except one or two of the pale China kind⁠—the monthly rose, as Miss Barbara called it, which is so faithful and blows almost all the year round⁠—there were no roses in May; but there was a wealth of spring flowers filling all the borders, and the air was faintly sweet as the old lady walked about in the morning sunshine enjoying the freshness and stir of budding life. She was a portly old lady herself, fresh and fair, with a bright complexion, notwithstanding seventy years of wear and tear, and lively hazel eyes full of vivacity and inquisitiveness. She was one of the fortunate people who take an interest in everything, and to whom life continues full of excitement and variety to the end. She walked as briskly as though she had been twenty years younger, perhaps more so; for care does not press upon seventy as upon fifty, and the only burden upon her ample shoulders was that of years. She had a soft white Indian shawl wrapped round her, and a hood with very soft blue ribbons tied over her cap. She liked a pretty ribbon as well as ever, and was always well dressed. From the garden, which sloped downwards towards the river, there was an extensive view⁠—a prospect of fields and scattered farmhouses spreading into blue distance, into the outline of the hills, towards the north; at the right hand the tower of Dunearn Church, which was not more handsome than church towers generally are in Scotland; and to the left, towards the setting sun, a glimpse of Tinto arrogantly seated on its plateau. Miss Barbara, as she said, “could not bide” the sight of Tinto House. She had planted it out as well as she could; but her trees were perverse, and would separate their branches or die away at the top, as if on purpose to reveal the upstart. On this particular morning of early May, Miss Barbara was not alone: she had a young lady by her side, of whose name and presence at this particular moment the country was full. There was not a house in the neighbourhood of any pretensions which she was not engaged to visit; and there was scarcely a family, if truth must be told, which was not involved more or less in an innocent conspiracy on her behalf, of which John Erskine, all unconscious, was the object. His old aunt, as was befitting, had the first chance.</p>
			<p>“You need not ask me any more questions,” Miss Barbara was saying, “for I think you know just as much about the family, and all the families in the countryside, as anybody. You have a fine curiosity, Nora; and take my word for it, that’s a grand gift, though never properly appreciated in this world. It gives you a great deal of interest in your youth, and it keeps you from wearying in your old age⁠—though that’s a far prospect for you.”</p>
			<p>“My mother says I am a gossip born,” said Nora, with her pretty smile.</p>
			<p>“Never you trouble your head about that⁠—take you always an interest in your fellow-creatures. Better that than the folk in a novelle. Not but what I like a good novelle myself as well as most things in this life. It’s just extending your field. It’s like going into a new neighbourhood. The box is come from the library this morning,” said Miss Barbara in a parenthesis.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, I opened it to have a peep. There is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Middlemarch</i> and one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Trollope’s, and several names I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>“No <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Middlemarch</i> for me,” said Miss Barbara, with a wave of her hand. “I am too old for that. That means I’ve read it, my dear⁠—the way an experienced reader like me can read a thing⁠—in the air, in the newspapers, in the way everybody talks. No, that’s not like going into a new neighbourhood⁠—that is getting to the secrets of the machinery, and seeing how everything, come the time, will run down, some to ill and harm, but all to downfall, commonplace, and prosiness. I have but little pleasure in that. And it’s pleasure I want at my time of life. I’m too old to be instructed. If I have not learned my lesson by this time, the more shame to me, my dear.”</p>
			<p>“But, Miss Barbara, you don’t want only to be amused. Oh no: to have your heart touched, sometimes wrung even⁠—to be so sorry, so anxious that you would like to interfere⁠—to follow on and on to the last moment through all their troubles, still hoping that things will take a good turn.”</p>
			<p>“And what is that but amusement?” said the old lady. “I am not fond of shedding tears; but even that is a luxury in its way⁠—when all the time you are sure that it will hurt nobody, and come all right at the end.”</p>
			<p>“Lydgate does not turn out all right at the end,” said Nora, “nor Rosamond either; they go down and down till you would be glad of some dreadful place at last that they might fall into it and be made an end of. I suppose it is true to nature,” said the girl, with a solemnity coming over her innocent face, “that if you don’t get better you should go on getting worse and worse⁠—but it is dreadful. It is like what one hears of the place⁠—below.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, ay, we’re not fond nowadays of the place⁠—below; but I’m afraid there must be some truth in it. That woman has found out the secret, you see.” Miss Barbara meant no disrespect to the great novelist when she called her “that woman.” There was even a certain gratification in the use of the term, as who should say, “Your men, that brag so much of themselves, never found this out”⁠—which was a favourite sentiment with the old lady. “That’s just where she’s grand,” Miss Barbara continued. “There’s that young lad in the Italian book⁠—Teeto⁠—what d’ye call him? To see him get meaner and meaner, and falser and falser, is an awful picture, Nora. It’s just terrible. It’s more than I can stand at my age. I want diversion. Do ye think I have not seen enough of that in my life?”</p>
			<p>“People are not bad like that in life,” said Nora; “they have such small sins⁠—they tell fibs⁠—not big lies that mean anything, but small miserable little fibs; and they are ill-tempered, and sometimes cheat a little. That is all. Nothing that is terrible or tragical⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here the girl stopped short with a little gasp, as if realising something she had not thought of before.</p>
			<p>“What is it, my dear?” said Miss Barbara.</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—only Tinto showing through the trees: is that tragedy? No, no. Don’t you see what I mean? don’t you see the difference? He is only a rough, ill-tempered, tyrannical man. He does not really mean to hurt or be cruel: and poor Lady Car, dear Lady Car, is always so wretched; perhaps she aggravates him a little. She will not take pleasure in anything. It is all miserable, but it is all so little, Miss Barbara; not tragedy⁠—not like Lear or Hamlet⁠—rather a sort of scolding, peevish comedy. You might make fun of it all, though it is so dreadful; and that is how life seems to me⁠—very different from poetry,” said Nora, shaking her head.</p>
			<p>“Wait,” said Miss Barbara, patting her on the shoulder, “till the play is played out and you are farther off. The Lord preserve us! I hope I’m not a prophet of evil; but maybe if you had known poor Lear fighting about the number of his knights with that hard-faced woman Regan, for instance (who had a kind of reason, you’ll mind, on her side: for I make no doubt they were very unruly⁠—that daft old man would never keep them in order), you would have thought it but a poor kind of a squabble. Who is this coming in upon us, Nora? I see Janet at the glass door looking out.</p>
			<p>“It is a gentleman, Miss Barbara. He is standing talking. I think he means to come out here.”</p>
			<p>“It will be the minister,” said the old lady, calmly. “He had far better sit down in the warm room, and send us word, for he’s a delicate creature⁠—no constitution in him⁠—aye cold and coughs, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Indeed it is not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Stirling. He is quite young and⁠—and good-looking, I think. He won’t listen to Janet. He is coming here. Miss Barbara, shall I run away?”</p>
			<p>“Why should you run away? If it’s business, we’ll go in; if it’s pleasure⁠—Ah! I’ve seen your face before, sir, or one like it, but I cannot put a name to it. You have maybe brought me a letter? Preserve us all! will it be John Erskine come home to Dalrulzian?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, aunt Barbara, it is John Erskine,” said the young man. He had his hat in one hand, and the sun shone pleasantly on his chestnut locks and healthful countenance. He did not perhaps look like a hero of romance, but he looked like a clean and virtuous young Englishman. He took the hand which Miss Barbara held out to him, eagerly, and, with a little embarrassment, not knowing what else to do, bent over it and kissed it⁠—a salutation which took the old lady by surprise, and, being so unusual, brought a delicate colour to her old cheek.</p>
			<p>“Ah, my man! and so you’re John Erskine? I would have known you anywhere, at the second glance if not at the first. You’re like your father, poor fellow. He was always a great favourite with me. And so you’ve come back to your ain at last? Well, I’m very glad to see you, John. It’s natural to have a young Erskine in the countryside. You’ll not know yet how you like it after all this long absence. And how is your mother, poor body? She would think my pity out of place, I don’t doubt; but I’m always sorry for a young woman, sore hadden down with a sma’ family, as we say here in the North.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think she is at all sorry for herself,” said John, with a laugh, “but it must be allowed there is a lot of them. There are always heaps of children, you know, in a parson’s house.”</p>
			<p>“And that is true; it’s a wonderful dispensation,” said Miss Barbara, piously, “to keep us down and keep us humble-minded in our position in life. But I’m real glad to see you, and you must tell me where you’ve come from, and all you’ve been doing. We’ll take a turn round the garden and see my flowers, and then we’ll take you in and give you your luncheon. You’ll be ready for your luncheon after your walk; or did you ride? This is Miss Nora Barrington, that knows Dalrulzian better than you do, John. Tell Janet, my dear, we’ll be ready in an hour, and she must do her best for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John.”</p>
			<p>While this greeting went on, Nora had been standing very demurely with her hands crossed looking on. She was a girl full of romance and imagination, as a girl ought to be, and John Erskine had long been something of a hero to her. Nora was in that condition of springtime and anticipation when every new encounter looks as if it might produce untold consequences in the future, still so vague, so sweet, so unknown. She stood with her eyes full of subdued light, full of soft excitement, and observation, and fun; for where all was so airy and uncertain, there was room for fun too, it being always possible that the event, which might be serious or even tragic, might at the same time be only a pleasantry in life. Nora seemed to herself to be a spectator of what was perhaps happening to herself. Might this be hereafter a scene in her existence, like “the first meeting between”⁠—say Antony and Cleopatra, say Romeo and Juliet? Several pictures occurred to her of such scenes. At one time there were quite a number of them in all the picture-galleries. “First meeting of Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> with Elizabeth Woodville:” where all unconscious, the fair widow kneels, the gallant monarch sees in his suppliant his future queen. All this was fun to Nora, but very romantic earnest all the same. The time might come when this stranger would say to her⁠—“Do you remember that May morning in old aunt Barbara’s garden?” and she might reply⁠—“How little we imagined <em>then</em>!” Thus Nora, with a shy delight, forestalled in the secret recesses of her soul the happiness that might never come, and yet made fun of her own thoughts all in the same breath. John’s bow to her was not half so graceful or captivating as his salutation to Miss Barbara, but that was nothing; and she went away with a pleasant sense of excitement to instruct Janet about the luncheon and the newcomer. Miss Barbara’s household was much moved by the arrival. Janet, who was the housekeeper, lingered in the little hall into which the garden-door opened, looking out with a curiosity which she did not think it necessary to disguise; and Agnes, Miss Barbara’s own woman, stood at the staircase-window, halfway up. When Nora came in, those two personages were conversing freely on the event.</p>
			<p>“He’s awfu’ like the Erskines; just the cut of them about the shouthers, and that lang neck⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Do you ca’ that a lang neck? nae langer than is very becoming. I like the head carried high. He has his father’s walk,” said Agnes, pensively; “many’s the time I’ve watched him alang the street. He was the best-looking of all the Erskines; if he hadna marriet a bit handless creature⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Handless or no’ handless,” said Janet, “matters little in that condition o’ life.”</p>
			<p>“Eh, but it mattered muckle to him. He might have been a living man this day if there had been a little mair sense in her head. She might have made him change his wet feet and all his dreeping things when he came in from the hillside. It was the planting of yon trees that cost bonnie Johnny Erskine his life. The mistress was aye of that opinion. Eh, to think when ye have a man, that ye shouldna be able to take care of him!” said Agnes, with a sort of admiring wonder. She had never attained that dignity herself. Janet, who was a widow, gave a glance upward at the pensive old maiden of mingled condescension and contempt.</p>
			<p>“And if ye had a man, ye would be muckle made up wi’ him,” she said. “It’s grand to be an auld maid, for that⁠—that ye aye keep your faith in the men. This ane’ll be for a wife, too, like a’ the rest. I could gie him a word in his ear⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It will be something for our young misses to think about. A fine young lad, and a bonnie house. He’ll have a’ our siller, besides his ain⁠—and that will be a grand addition⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If he behaves himsel’!” said Janet, “The mistress is a real sensible woman. You’ll no’ see her throw away her siller upon a prodigal, if he were an Erskine ten times over.”</p>
			<p>“And wha said he was a prodigal?” cried Agnes, turning round from the landing upon her fellow-servant, who was at once her natural opponent and bosom friend. Nora was of opinion by this time that she had listened long enough.</p>
			<p>“Miss Barbara says that her nephew will stay to luncheon, Janet. You are to do your best for him. It is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine, from Dalrulzian,” Nora said, with most unnecessary explanation. Janet turned round upon her quietly, yet with superior dignity.</p>
			<p>“By this time of day, Miss Nora,” said Janet, “I think I ken an Erskine when I see him; and also, when a visitor enters this door at twelve o’clock at noon, that he’ll stay to his lunch, and that I maun do my best.”</p>
			<p>“It is not my fault,” cried the girl, half amused, half apologetic. “I tell you only, Janet, what Miss Barbara said. Perhaps it was to get rid of me, to send me indoors out of the way.”</p>
			<p>“Naething more likely,” said the housekeeper. “She canna be fashed with strangers when her ain are at her hand.”</p>
			<p>“Woman!” cried Agnes, from the landing, “how dare you say sae of my mistress? You’ll never mind, Miss Nora. Come up here, my bonnie young leddy, and you’ll have a grand sight of him among the trees.”</p>
			<p>“Ay, glower at him,” said Janet, as she went away. “You wouldna be so muckle ta’en up with them if ye kent as much about men as me.”</p>
			<p>“Na, you’ll pay no attention,” said Agnes anxiously; “it’s no’ real malice⁠—just she thinks she has mair experience. And so she has mair experience⁠—the only marriet woman in the house. There’s your mamma, with a bonnie family, takes nothing upon her, no more than if she was a single person; but Janet has it a’ her ain way. Stand you here, Miss Nora, at this corner, and you’ll have a grand sight of him. He’s behind the big bourtree-bush; but in a moment⁠—in a moment⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine,” said Nora, laughing. “I have seen him; most likely I shall see him at lunch. He is just like other people⁠—like dozens of gentlemen⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Eh, but when you think that you never ken what may happen⁠—that <em>yon</em> may be the man, for all we ken!”</p>
			<p>When Agnes thus put into words the idea which had (she would not deny it to herself) glanced through Nora’s own mind, she was so hypocritical as to laugh, as at a great piece of absurdity⁠—but at the same time so honest as to blush.</p>
			<p>“I believe you are always thinking of⁠—that sort of thing,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Awfu’ often, Miss Nora,” said Agnes, unabashed⁠—“especially when there’s young folk about; and after a’, is there onything that’s sae important? There’s me and the mistress, we’ve stood aloof from a’ that; but I canna think it’s been for oor happiness. Her⁠—it was her ain doing; but me⁠—it’s a very strange thing to say: I’ve kent many that were far from my superiors⁠—as far as a person can judge⁠—that have had twa-three offers; but me, I never had it in my power. You’ll think it a very strange thing, Miss Nora?”</p>
			<p>“I know,” said Nora; “and you so pretty. It is quite extraordinary.” This was the reply that Agnes expected to her favourite confession. She was pretty still at fifty⁠—slim and straight, with delicate features, and that ivory complexion which we associate with refinement and good blood; and the old waiting-woman knew how to <i xml:lang="fr">faire valoir</i> her fine person and features. She was dressed delicately in a black gown, with a white kerchief of spotless net⁠—like a lady, everybody said. She shook her head with a smile of melancholy consciousness.</p>
			<p>“It’s no’ looks that does it,” she said; “it’s⁠—Well, I canna tell. It’s when you ken how to humour them and flatter them. But bless me, there’s Janet, a woman that never flattered man nor woman either! I canna understand it⁠—it’s beyond me. But you mustna follow the mistress, Miss Nora. She’s a happy woman enough, and a bonnie woman for her age, coming up there under her ain trees⁠—just look at her. But if that young lad had been her son, instead of just a distant cousin⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, but boys give a great deal of trouble,” said Nora, seriously. “Dear Miss Barbara, I like her best as she is.”</p>
			<p>“But you manna follow her example, my bonnie leddy⁠—you manna follow her example. Take a pattern by your ain mammaw. I ca’ her a happy woman, young yet, and a good man, and a bonnie posie of bairns. Eh! I ca’ her a happy woman. And takes nothing upon her!” said Agnes⁠—“nothing upon her. You’ll come up the stair, Miss Nora, and look at yoursel’ in the glass. Oh no, there’s nothing wrang with your bonnie hair. I like it just so⁠—a wee blown about in the mornin’ air. Untidy! bless me, no’ the least untidy! but just⁠—give a look in the glass, and if you think another colour would be more becoming, I have plenty ribbons. Some folk thinks yellow’s very artistic; but the mistress canna bide yellow. She’s owre fair for it, and so are you.”</p>
			<p>“Why should I change my ribbon? It is quite tidy,” said Nora, almost with indignation, standing before Miss Barbara’s long cheval-glass. Agnes came and stood behind her, arranging her little collar and the draperies of her dress with caressing hands. And to tell the truth, Nora herself could not shut out from her mind an agreeable consciousness that she was looking “rather nice;⁠—for me,” she added, in her own mind. The morning breeze had ruffled an incipient curl out of the hair which she had brushed, demure and smooth, over her forehead in the morning. It was a thing that nobody suspected when she was fresh from her toilet, but the wind always found out that small eccentricity, and Nora was not angry with the wind. Her ribbon was blue, and suited her far better than the most artistic yellow. All was fresh and fair about her, like the spring morning. “Na; I wouldna change a thing,” Agnes said, looking at her anxiously in the glass, where they made the prettiest picture, the handsome old maid looking like a lady-in-waiting, her fine head appearing over the girl’s shoulder⁠—a lady-in-waiting anxiously surveying her princess, about to meet for the first time with King Charming, who has come to marry her. This was the real meaning of the group.</p>
			<p>Nora did not change her ribbon or her own appearance in any way, but she gave a glance to the table set out for luncheon, and renewed the flowers on it, watching all the while the other group which passed and repassed the large round window of the dining-room, their voices audible as they talked. Miss Barbara had taken John’s arm, which was a proof that he had found the way to her favour; and she was evidently asking him a hundred questions. Snatches of their talk about his travels, about his plans, something which she could not make out about the Lindores, caught the ear of Nora. They saw her seated near the window, so there could be no reason why she should stop her ears. And Nora thought him “very nice”⁠—that all-useful adjective. She could scarcely help letting her imagination stray to the familiar place which she had known all her life⁠—her “dear Dalrulzian,” which she had lamented so openly, which now she felt it would no longer be decorous to lament. He looked very like it, she thought. She could see him in imagination standing in the kindly open door, on the Walk, looking the very master the place wanted. Papa had been too old for it. It wanted a young man, a young⁠—Well⁠—she laughed and coloured involuntarily⁠—of course a young wife too. In all likelihood <em>that</em> was all settled, the young wife ready, so that there was no reason to feel any embarrassment about it. And so he knew the Lindores! She would ask Edith all about him. There was no doubt he was a very interesting figure in the countryside, “something for the misses to think about,” as Agnes said, though it was somewhat humiliating to think that “that dreadful man at Tinto” had roused a similar excitement. But the oftener John Erskine passed the window, the more he pleased Nora Barrington. He was “very nice,” she was sure. How kind and careful he was of Miss Barbara! How frank and open his countenance! his voice and his laugh so natural and cheerful! Up to this time, though Nora’s imagination had not been utterly untouched, she was still free of any serious inclination, almost if not entirely fancy-free. It could not be denied that when the new Rintoul became known in the countryside, he, too, had been the object of many prognostications. And he had been, she felt, “very nice” to Nora. Though he had pretensions far above hers, and was not in the least likely to ally himself to a family without fortune, his advances had been such as a girl cannot easily overlook. He was the first who had paid Nora “attention,” and awakened her to a consciousness of power. And she had been flattered and pleased, being very young. But Nora now felt herself at that junction of the two roads, which, as has been said, is inevitable in the experience of every young soul. She was standing in suspense, saying to herself, with a partial sense of treachery and guilt, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine was still more nice than Lord Rintoul. John Erskine of Dalrulzian; there was something delightful in the very name. All this, it is true, was entirely visionary, without solid foundation of any kind; for they had exchanged nothing but two shy bows, not a word as yet⁠—and whether he would be as “nice” when he talked, Nora did not know.</p>
			<p>Her decision afterwards, made with some mortification, was, that he was not nearly so nice when he talked. He showed no wish to talk to her at all, which was an experience quite out of Nora’s way. She sat and listened, for the most part, at this simple banquet, growing angry in spite of herself, and altogether changing her opinion about Lord Rintoul. If she had been a little girl out of the nursery, John Erskine could scarcely have taken less notice of her. Miss Barbara and he continued their talk as if Nora had no existence at all.</p>
			<p>“I always thought it a great pity that you were brought up so far from home,” the old lady said. “You know nothing about your own place, or the ways of the countryside. It will take you a long time to make that up. But the neighbours are all very kind, and Lindores, no doubt, will be a great resource, now there’s a young family in it. Fortunately for you, John, you’re not grand enough nor rich enough to come into my lord’s plans.”</p>
			<p>“Has my lord plans? For county hospitals and lunatic asylums. So he told me; and he wants my help. To hear even so much as that astonished me. When I knew him he was an elegant hypochondriac, doing nothing at all⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He does plenty now, and cares much, for the world and the things of the world,” said Miss Barbara. “I think I have divined his meaning; but we’ll wait and see. You need not sit and make those faces at me, Nora. I know well enough <em>they</em> are not to blame. A woman should know how to stand up for her own child better than that; but she was just struck helpless with surprise, I say nothing different. Speak of manoeuvring mothers! manoeuvring fathers are a great deal worse. I cannot away with a man that will sacrifice his own flesh and blood. Fiegh! I would not do it for a kingdom. And the son, you’ll see, will do the same. Hold you your tongue, Nora. I know better⁠—the son will do the very same. He will be sold to some grocer’s daughter for her hogsheads. Perhaps they’re wanted; two jointures to pay is hard upon any estate, and a title will always bring in money when it’s put up for sale in a judicious way. But you must have your wits about you now, if you have any dealings with your elegant hypochondriac, John, my man. You’re too small⁠—too small for him; but if you had fifty thousand a-year, you would soon⁠—soon be helpless in his hands⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Miss Barbara,” cried Nora, “you are unjust to Lord Lindores. Remember how kind he has been to us, and we have not fifty thousand, nor fifty hundred a-year.”</p>
			<p>“You’re not a young man,” said Miss Barbara; “but John, take you care of dangling about Lindores. I am not naming any names; but there may be heartaches gotten there⁠—nothing more for a man of your small means. Oh ay! perhaps I ought to hold my tongue before Nora; but she will be well advised if she takes care too; and besides, she knows all about it as well as I do myself.”</p>
			<p>“I hope,” said John, courteously⁠—for he saw that Nora’s composure was disturbed by these last warnings, and he was glad of a chance to change the subject⁠—“I hope I may be so fortunate as to see Colonel Barrington before he leaves the country. He has done so well by Dalrulzian, I should like to thank him for his care.”</p>
			<p>This made Nora more red than before. She could not get over that foolish idea that Dalrulzian was far more to her than to this stranger, who could not care for it as she did. She felt that his thanks were an offence. “Papa has gone, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine,” she said, with unusual stateliness. “I am left behind to pay some visits. Everybody here has been so good to us.”</p>
			<p>“That means we are all fond of her bit bright face,” said Miss Barbara; “but we’ll say no more on that subject, Nora. Human nature’s selfish in grain. The like of me will take no trouble for lad or lass that is not sweet to see, and a comfort to the heart.”</p>
			<p>“I never heard such a pretty apology for selfishness before,” said John. And Miss Barbara took his compliment in good part. But he and Nora made no further approach to each other. Those praises of her made him draw back visibly, she thought, and embarrassed herself beyond bearing. To be praised before an unsympathetic, silently protesting audience⁠—can anything be more humiliating? Nora was conscious of something like dislike of John Erskine before he went away.</p>
			<p>And yet his state of feeling was natural enough. He believed that the young lady, so dangerously suitable for him, the very wife he wanted, was being thrust upon him on every side, and the thought revolted him. No doubt he thought, if she were conscious of it, it must be revolting to her too; and in such a case the highest politeness was to be all but rude to her, to show at once and conclusively that schemes of the kind were hopeless. This sentiment was strengthened in the present case by the irritation caused by Miss Barbara’s warning about Lindores, and the heartache which was all that a man of his means was likely to get there. He laughed at it, yet it made him angry. He who had been always used to feel himself a person of importance⁠—he for whom, even now, the whole country was taking the trouble to scheme⁠—to have himself suddenly classified with other small deer as quite beneath the consideration of the Lindores family, too small for my lord’s plans! It was scarcely possible to imagine anything more irritating. After all, a Scotch lord was no such grand affair; and John could not be ignorant that, five years ago, neither father nor mother would have repulsed him. Now! but the doubt, the risk, did not induce the young man to be wise⁠—to put Lady Edith out of his imagination, and turn his thoughts to the other, just as pretty, if that were all, who was manifestly within his reach. What a pity that young people are so slow to see reason in such matters, that they will never take the wiser way! Thus John had his opportunity offered to him to escape from a world of troubles and embarrassments before he had committed himself to that dangerous path; and distinctly refused, and turned his back upon it, not knowing⁠—as indeed at the real turning-point of our fortunes we none of us know.</p>
			<p>But as he set out on his homeward walk, his eyes caught that great house of Tinto, which from Dunearn was the central object in the landscape⁠—an immense house, seated on a high platform of rock, dominating the river and the whole country, with scarcely wood enough about it to afford any shadow; an ostentatious pile of building, with that spot of audacious red against the grey sky⁠—the flag always flying (set him up! Miss Barbara said) when the master was at home, which was, so to speak, the straw which broke the camel’s back, the supreme piece of vanity which the county could not tolerate. Pat Torrance to mount a flag upon his house to mark his presence! What more could Sacred Majesty itself do? John Erskine felt as if some malicious spirit had thrown a stone at him out of the clouds as his eye was caught by that flaunting speck of red. He felt all the local intolerance of the man, without a claim but his money to crow thus over his neighbours. And then he thought of Carry Lindores and her poetry and enthusiasm. That was how the Earl disposed of his daughters. A thrill ran through John’s frame, but it was a thrill of defiance. He raised his stick unawares and waved it, as if at the big bully who thus scorned him from afar.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
