<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXXV</h2>
			<p>‚ÄúYour master is just a young fool. Why, in the name of a‚Äô that‚Äôs reasonable,‚Äù cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, ‚Äúdid he not send for me?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSir,‚Äù said Rolls, ‚Äúyou‚Äôre too sensible a man not to know that the last thing a lad is likely to do is what‚Äôs reasonable, especially when he‚Äôs in that flurry, and just furious at being blamed.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny was walking up and down his business room with much haste and excitement. His house was built on the side of a slope, so that the room, which was level with the road on one side, was elevated on the upper floor at the other, and consequently had the advantage of a view bounded, as was general, by ‚Äúthat eternal Tinto,‚Äù as he was in the habit of calling it. The good man, greatly disturbed by what he heard, walked to his window and stared out as Rolls spoke. And he shook his fist at the distant object of so many troubles. ‚ÄúHim and his big house and his ill ways‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey‚Äôve been the trouble of the country-side those fifteen years and more,‚Äù cried the excited ‚Äúman of business‚Äù; ‚Äúand now we‚Äôre not done with him, even when he‚Äôs dead.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFar from done with him,‚Äù said Rolls, shaking his head. He was seated on the edge of a chair with his hat in his lap and a countenance of dismay. ‚ÄúIf I might make so bold as to ask,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúwhat would ye say, sir, would be done if the worst came to the worst? I‚Äôm no‚Äô saying to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine indiveedually,‚Äù added Rolls‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúfor it‚Äôs my belief he‚Äôs had nothing ado with it‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut granting that it‚Äôs some person and no mere accident‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow can I tell‚ÅÝ‚Äîor any man?‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny. ‚ÄúIt depends entirely on the nature of the act. It‚Äôs all supposition, so far as I can see. To pitch Pat Torrance over the Scaur, him and his big horse, with murderous intent, is more than John Erskine could have done, or any man I know. And there was no quarrel or motive. Culpable homicide‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôll be what the English gentleman called manslaughter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúManslaughter is a wide word. It would all depend on the circumstances. A year; maybe six months only‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIf it were to turn out so‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich I do not for a moment believe‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, fixing his eyes upon Rolls with a determination which betrayed internal feebleness of belief.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNor me, sir‚ÅÝ‚Äînor me!‚Äù cried Rolls, with the same look. They were like two conspirators regarding each other with the consciousness of the plot, which, even between themselves, each eyeing the other, they were determined to deny.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut if by any evil chance it were to turn out so‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI would advise a plain statement,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äújust a plain statement, concealing nothing. That should have been done at the moment: help should have been sought at the moment; there‚Äôs the error. A misadventure like that might happen to any man. We might any of us be the means of such an accident: but panic is just the worst policy. Panic looks like guilt. If he‚Äôs been so far left to himself as to take fright‚ÅÝ‚Äîto see that big man on his big horse thunderin‚Äô over the Scaur would be enough to make any man lose his head,‚Äù the agent added, with a sort of apology in his tone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf you could think of the young master as in that poseetion,‚Äù said Rolls.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhich is just impossible,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said, and then there was a little pause. ‚ÄúThe wisest thing,‚Äù he went on, ‚Äúwould be, just as I say, a plain statement. Such and such a thing happened. I lost my head. I thought there was nothing to be done. I was foolish enough to shrink from the name of it, or from the coolness it would make between me and my friends. Ay, very likely that might be the cause‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe coolness it would make between him and the family at Lindores‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre meaning always if there was onything in it at a‚Äô?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is what I‚Äôm meaning. I will go and see him at once,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said, ‚Äúand that is the advice I will give. A plain story whatever it may be‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust the facts; neither extenuate nor set down aught in malice. And as for you, Rolls, that seem to be mixed up in it yourself‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAy, sir; I‚Äôm mixed up in it,‚Äù said Rolls, turning upon him an inquiring yet half-defiant glance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was you that found the body first. It was you that met your master at the gate. You‚Äôre the most important witness, so far as I can see. Lord bless us, man!‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, forgetting precaution, ‚Äúhad you not the judgment, when you saw the lad had been in a tuilzie, to get him out of other folk‚Äôs sight, and keep it to yourself?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere was John Tamson as well as me,‚Äù said Rolls, very gravely; and then he added, ‚Äúbut ye canna see yet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, how it may a‚Äô turn.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI see plenty,‚Äù said the man of business, impatiently; and then he added, ‚Äúthe best thing you can do is to find out all you can about the ground, and other details. It was always unsafe; and there had been a great deal of rain. Very likely it was worse than ordinary that day. And call to mind any circumstances that might tell on our side. Ye had better come to me and make me acquainted with all your observations. Neglect nothing. The very way the beast was lying, if ye can rightly remember, might be a help. You‚Äôre not without sense, Rolls. I‚Äôve always had a high opinion of your sense. Now here‚Äôs a chance for you to prove it‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAnd come back to me, and we‚Äôll judge how the evidence tends. There‚Äôs no need,‚Äù he said, standing at the window once more with his back to his pupil, ‚Äúto bring out any points that might turn‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe other way.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not just such a fool as‚ÅÝ‚Äîsome folk think,‚Äù said Rolls; ‚Äúand yet,‚Äù he added, in an undertone, ‚Äúfor a‚Äô that, you canna see, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, how it may all turn‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt haver, Rolls,‚Äù said the agent, turning upon him angrily; ‚Äúor speak out what you mean. There is no man can say how a thing will turn but he that has perfect knowledge of all the circumstances‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich is not my case.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs what I was saying, sir,‚Äù said Rolls, with a tranquil assumption which roused <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚Äôs temper; but the old man was so solemn in his air of superior knowledge, so full of sorrowful decision and despondency, that anger seemed out of place. The other grew alarmed as he looked at him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor God‚Äôs sake, man,‚Äù he cried, ‚Äúif there‚Äôs anything behind that I don‚Äôt know, tell it! let me hear the worst. We must know the worst, if it‚Äôs to make the best of it. Hide nothing from me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI give ye my word, sir, I‚Äôll hide nothing‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen the time comes,‚Äù said Rolls, with a sigh; ‚Äúbut I canna just unburden my bozume at this moment. There‚Äôs mair thought needful and mair planning. And there‚Äôs one thing I would like to make sure of, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny. If I‚Äôm put to expenses, or otherwise laid open to risk and ootlay‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs no doubt but it would be made up to me? And if, as might happen, anything serious was to befall‚ÅÝ‚Äîwithout doubt the young maister would think himself bound to take good care o‚Äô Bauby? She‚Äôs my sister, maybe you‚Äôll mind: an aixcellent housekeeper and a good woman, though maybe I should leave her praises to ither folk. You see he hasna been brought up in the midst o‚Äô his ain folk, so to speak, or I would have little doubt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI cannot conceive what you mean, Rolls. Of course I know Bauby and her cookery both; but what risk you should run, or what she can have to do with it! Your expenses of course,‚Äù said the agent, with a contemptuous wave of his hand, ‚Äúyou may be sure enough of. But you must have done pretty well in the service of the Dalrulzian family, Rolls. I‚Äôm surprised that you should think of this at such a moment‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs just what I expectit, sir,‚Äù said Rolls; ‚Äúbut maybe I ken my ain affairs best, having no man of business. And about Bauby, she‚Äôs just what I care for most. I wouldna have her vexed or distresst for siller, or put out of her ordinar. The maister he‚Äôs but a young man, and no‚Äô attached to us as he would have been had he been brought up at hame. It‚Äôs a great drawback to a young lad, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚ÄîRolls broke off his personal argument to say sententiously‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúnot to be brought up at hame.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause he does not get the chance of becoming attached to his servants?‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, with an impatient laugh. ‚ÄúPerhaps it may be so, but this is a curious moment to moralise on the subject.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚Äô so curious as you think, sir; but I will not weary you,‚Äù said Rolls, with some dignity. ‚ÄúWhen I was saying ootlay, I meant mair than just a sixpence here or there. But Bauby‚Äôs the grand question. I‚Äôm in a strange kind of a poseetion, and the one thing I‚Äôm clear in is my duty to her. She‚Äôs been a rael guid sister to me; aye made me comfortable, studiet my ways, took an interest in all my bits o‚Äô fykes. I would ill like either scorn or trouble to come to Bauby. She‚Äôs awfu‚Äô soft-hearted,‚Äù said the old butler, solemnly gazing into vacancy with a reddening of his eyes. Something of that most moving of all sentiments, self-pity, was in his tone. He foresaw Bauby‚Äôs apron at her eyes for him, and in her grief over her brother, his own heart was profoundly moved. ‚ÄúThere will be some things that nobody can save her from: but for all that concerns this world, if I could be sure that nothing would happen to Bauby‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, Rolls, you‚Äôre past my comprehension,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny; ‚Äúbut so far as taking care of Bauby in case anything happens to you‚ÅÝ‚Äîthough what should happen to you I have yet to learn.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is just so,‚Äù said Rolls, getting up slowly. There was about him altogether a great solemnity, like a man at a funeral, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said afterwards. ‚ÄúI cannot expect you to know, sir‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs atween me and my Maker. I‚Äôm no‚Äô going back to Dalrulzian. I cannot have my mind disturbed at this awfu‚Äô moment, as ye say, with weemen and their ways. If ye see the English gentleman, ye‚Äôll maybe explain. Marget has a very guid notion o‚Äô waitin‚Äô; she can do all that‚Äôs necessary; and for me, I‚Äôve ither work in hand.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou must not look at everything in so gloomy a spirit, Rolls,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, holding out his hand. He was not in the habit of shaking hands with the butler, but there are occasions when rules are involuntarily broken through.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo‚Äô a gloomy spirit, sir, but awfu‚Äô serious,‚Äù said Rolls. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôll tell the young maister no‚Äô to be down-hearted, but at the same time no‚Äô to be that prood. Help may come when it‚Äôs little looked for. I‚Äôm no‚Äô a man of mony words, but I‚Äôve been, as you say, sir, attached to the family all my days, and I have just a feeling for them more than common. The present gentleman‚Äôs mother‚ÅÝ‚Äîher that married the English minister‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas no‚Äô just what suited the house. Dalrulzian was nothing to her; and that‚Äôs what I compleen o‚Äô, that the young man was never brought up at hame, to have confidence in his ain folk. It would have been greatly for his advantage, sir,‚Äù continued Rolls, ‚Äúif he had but had the discernment to see that our bonnie Miss Nora was just the person;‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I mustna think now of making conditions,‚Äù he said, hurriedly‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúwe‚Äôll leave that to his good sense. Mony thanks to you, sir, for hearing me out, and shaking my hand as ye‚Äôve done; though there‚Äôs maybe things I have said that are a wee hard to understand.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAy, Rolls,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, laughing, ‚Äúyou‚Äôre just like the other prophets; a great deal of what you‚Äôve said is Greek and Hebrew to me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo doubt, no doubt,‚Äù said Rolls, shaking his head; there was no smile in him, not a line in his countenance that marked even incipient humour. Whatever he meant it was deadly earnest to Rolls. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny stood and watched him go out, with a laugh gurgling low down in his throat. ‚ÄúHe was always a conceited body,‚Äù he said to himself. But his inclination to laughter subsided as his visitor disappeared. It was no moment for laughing. And when Rolls was gone, the temptation to speculate on his words, and put meaning into them, subsided also, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny gave himself up with great seriousness to consider the position. He ordered his little country carriage‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomething of the phaeton order, but not elegant enough for classification‚ÅÝ‚Äîand drove away as quickly as his comfortable cob would consent to go, to where John was. Such a thing had not happened to any person of importance in the county since he could remember. Debt, indeed‚ÅÝ‚Äîdebt was common enough, and plenty of trouble always, about money, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said to himself, shaking his head, as he went along. There had been borrowings and hypothecations of all sorts enough to make a financier‚Äôs hair stand on end; but crime never! Not that men were better here than in other quarters; but among the gentry that had never happened. The good man ran on, in a rambling inaudible soliloquy, or rather colloquy with himself, as he drove on, asking how it was, after all, that incidents of the kind were so rare among the gentry. Was the breed better? He shook his head, remembering himself of various details which interfered with so easy a solution. Or was it that things were more easily hushed up? or that superior education enforced a greater respect for the world‚Äôs opinion, and made offences of this sort almost impossible? It was a strange thing (he thought) when you came to think of it. A fellow, now, like the late Tinto would have been in every kind of scrape had he been a poor man; but somehow, being a rich one, he had kept out of the hands of the law. Such a thing never happened from year‚Äôs end to year‚Äôs end. And to think now that it was not one of our ordinary Scots lairds, but the pink of education and good breeding, from England and abroad! This gave a momentary theoretical satisfaction to his musings by the way. But immediately after, he thought with self-reproach that it was young Erskine of whom he was permitting himself such criticism: young Dalrulzian, poor lad! all the more to be pitied that he had been brought up, as Rolls said, away from home, and with no father to look after him. The cob was used to take his own way along those roads which he knew so well, but at this point <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny touched him with the indignity of a whip, and hurried along. He met Beaufort returning, driving, with a little hesitation at the corner of the road, John‚Äôs dogcart homeward; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny thought he recognised the dogcart, but he did not stop to say anything to the stranger, who naturally knew nothing of him. Nor was his interview with John at all satisfactory when he came to his journey‚Äôs end. The young man received his man of business with that air of levity which, mixed with indignation, had been his prevailing mood since his arrest. He laughed when he said, ‚ÄúThis is a curious place to receive you in,‚Äù and for some time he would scarcely give any heed to the anxious questions and suggestions of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny. At length, however, this veil was thrown off, and John permitted the family friend, of whose faithfulness he could have no doubt, to see the depth of wounded feeling that lay below. ‚ÄúOf course it can be nothing to me,‚Äù he said, still holding his head high. ‚ÄúThey cannot prove a falsehood, however they may wish it; but to think that of all these men with whom I have eaten and drunk, who have professed to welcome me for my father‚Äôs sake‚ÅÝ‚Äîto think that not one of them would step in to stand by a fellow, or give him the least support‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhen you reflect that even I knew nothing about it,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúnot a word‚ÅÝ‚Äîtill old Rolls came‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDid you hear none of the talk?‚Äù said John. ‚ÄúI did not hear it, indeed, but I have felt it in the air. I knew there was something. Everybody looked at me suspiciously; the very tone of their voice was changed‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy own servants‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour servants are very anxious about you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine, if I may judge from old Rolls. I have seldom seen a man so overcome; and if you will reflect that your other friends throughout the county can have heard nothing, any more than myself‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen you did not hear the talk?‚Äù said John, somewhat eagerly. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚Äôs countenance fell.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI paid no attention to it. There‚Äôs some story for ever going on in the country-side. Wise men just shut their ears,‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWise men are one thing and friends another,‚Äù said John. ‚ÄúHad I no one who could have told me, at least, on how small a thread my reputation hung? I might have gone away,‚Äù he said, with some vehemence, ‚Äúat the height of it. If business, or even pleasure, had called me, no doubt I should, without a notion of any consequences. When I think of that I shiver. Supposing I had gone away?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn that case,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, clearing his throat; but he never got any further. This alarm affected him greatly. He began to believe that his client might be innocent altogether‚ÅÝ‚Äîan idea which, notwithstanding all the disclaimers which he and Rolls had exchanged, had not crossed his mind before; but when he heard John‚Äôs story, his faith was shaken. He listened to it with the deepest interest, waiting for the moment when the confession would be made. But when it ended, without any end, so to speak, and John finally described Torrance as riding up towards the house, while he himself went down, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚Äôs countenance fell. He was disappointed. The tale was such as he expected, with this important difference‚ÅÝ‚Äîit wanted a conclusion. The listener gave a gasp of interest when the crisis arrived, but his interest flagged at once when it was over, and nothing had happened. ‚ÄúAnd then?‚Äù he said, breathlessly. And then?‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut there was no <i>then</i>. John gazed at him wondering, not perceiving the failure of the story. ‚ÄúThat is all,‚Äù he said. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny grew almost angry as he sat gazing at him across the table.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have just been telling Rolls,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúthat the best policy in such a case is just downright honest truth. To get into a panic and keep back anything is the greatest mistake. There is no need for any panic. You will be in the hands of those that take a great interest in you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJohn‚ÅÝ‚Äîbegging your pardon for using that name.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou do not seem satisfied with what I have told you,‚Äù John said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, <i>me</i>! it‚Äôs little consequence what I think; there‚Äôs plenty to be thought upon before me. I would make no bones about it. In most things the real truth is the best, but most especially when you‚Äôre under an accusation. I‚Äôm for no half measures, if you will let me say so.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will let you say whatever you please‚ÅÝ‚Äîso long as you understand what I am saying. I have told you everything. Do I look like a man in a panic?‚Äù said John.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPanic has many meanings. I make no doubt you are a brave man, and ready to face fire and sword if there was any need. But this is different. If you please, we‚Äôll not fail to understand each other for want of plain speaking. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine, I make no doubt that‚Äôs all as true as gospel; but there‚Äôs more to come. That‚Äôs just a part of the story, not the whole.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt mean to be offended by anything you say,‚Äù said John, cheerfully. ‚ÄúI feel that it means kindness. There is nothing more to come. It is not a part, but the whole. It is the truth, and everything I know.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny did not look up; he was drumming his foot softly against the table, and hanging his head with a despondent air as he listened. He did not stop the one nor raise the other, but went on working his under lip, which projected slightly. There is no such tacit evidence of dissatisfaction or unbelief. Some little sign invariably breaks the stillness of attention when the teller of a tale comes to its end, if his story has been believed. There is, if no words, some stir, however slight‚ÅÝ‚Äîmovement of one kind or another, if only the change of an attitude. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny did not pay this usual tribute when John‚Äôs voice stopped. It was a stronger protest than if he had said, ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt believe you,‚Äù in ordinary words.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI understand,‚Äù said John, after a pause of a full minute, which seemed to him an hour. He laughed with something between despair and defiance. ‚ÄúYour mode of communication is very unmistakable, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny. It is Scotch, I suppose. One has always heard of Scotch caution and cannyness.‚Äù If he had not been very bitter and sore at heart he would not have snatched at this aimless weapon of offence.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine,‚Äù said the agent, ‚Äúa sneer is always easy. Gibes break no bones, but neither have they any healing in them. You may say what you like to me, but an argument like that will do you terrible little good with them that will have to judge at the end. I am giving no opinion myself. On my own account I will speak frankly. I would rather not have heard this story‚ÅÝ‚Äîunless I was to hear‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù cried John, in the heat of personal offence.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMore,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, regretfully‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúmore; just another dozen words would have been enough; but if there is no more to say‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am not a man to make protestations of truth. There is no more to say, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell-a-well,‚Äù said the agent gloomily, shaking his head; ‚Äúwe must take just what is given‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe must try to make the best of it. And you think there‚Äôs nothing can be <i>proved</i> against you?‚Äù he said, with a slight emphasis. It required all John‚Äôs self-command to keep his temper. He had to remind himself forcibly of the true and steady and long-tried kindness with which this doubter had stood by him, and cared for his interests all his life‚ÅÝ‚Äîa wise steward, a just guardian. These thoughts kept unseemly expressions from his lips, but he was not the less sore at heart. Even after the first blow of the criminal examination and his detention in prison, it had all seemed to him so simple. What could be necessary but to tell his story with sufficient distinctness (in which he thought he had failed before the sheriff)? Surely truth and falsehood were distinguishable at a glance, especially by those who are accustomed to discriminate between them. But the blank of unbelief and disappointment with which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny heard his story chilled him to the heart. If he did not believe him, who would? He was angry, but anger is but a temporary sentiment when the mind is fairly at bay and finds itself hemmed in by difficulties and danger. He began to realise his position, the place in which he was, the circumstances surrounding him, as he had not yet done. The sheriff himself had been very civil, and deeply concerned to be the means of inflicting such an affront upon a county family; and he had added encouragingly that, on his return to Dunearn, in less than a week, when all the witnesses were got together, there was little doubt that a different light might be thrown on the affair; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny‚Äôs question was not so consolatory. ‚ÄúYou think there‚Äôs nothing can be <i>proved</i> against you?‚Äù John had been gazing at his agent across the table while all these painful reflections went through his mind.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI must be careful what I say. I am not speaking as a lawyer,‚Äù he said, with an uncomfortable smile. ‚ÄúWhat I meant was, that nothing could be proved which was untrue.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The agent shook his head. ‚ÄúWhen it‚Äôs circumstantial evidence, you can never build upon that,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúNo man saw it, you may say; but if all the facts point that way, it goes far with a jury. There are some other things you will perhaps tell me. Had you any quarrel ever with poor Tinto? Was there ill blood between you? Can any man give evidence, for example, ‚ÄòI heard the panel say that he would have it out with Pat Torrance‚Äô? or‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor heaven‚Äôs sake, what is the panel? and what connection is there between poor Torrance and‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSir,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, sternly, ‚Äúthis is no time for jests; the panel is a Scotch law term, meaning the defender; or what you call the defendant in England. It‚Äôs a terrible loss to a young man to be unacquainted even with the phraseology of his own country.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat is very true,‚Äù John said, with a laugh; ‚Äúbut at least it is no fault of mine. Well, suppose I am the panel, as you say‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat does not make me a vulgar brawler, does it, likely to display hostile intentions in that way? You may be sure no man can say of me that I threatened to have it out with Pat Torrance‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt was inadvertent‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was inadvertent,‚Äù said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, waving his hand, with a slight flush of confusion; ‚ÄúI daresay you never said Pat‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut what has that to do with it?‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou know my meaning. Is there any one that can be produced to say‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI have quarrelled with Torrance almost as often as I have met him,‚Äù said John, with obstinate decision. ‚ÄúI thought him a bully and a cad. If I did not tell him so, it was out of regard for his wife, and he was at liberty to find out my sentiments from my looks if it pleased him. I have never made the least pretence of liking the man.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny went on shaking his head. ‚ÄúAll this is bad,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúbad!‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut it does not make a quarrel in the eye of the law,‚Äù he added, more cheerfully; and he went on putting a variety of questions, of which John grew very weary. Some of these questions seemed to have very little bearing upon the subject; some irritated him as betraying beyond all a persistent doubt of his own story. Altogether, the first dreary afternoon in confinement was not made much more endurable by this visit. The room in which John had been placed was like the parlour of a somewhat shabby lodging-house‚ÅÝ‚Äînot worse than he had inhabited many a time while travelling. But the idea that he could not step outside, but was bound to this enclosure, was first ludicrous, and then intolerable. The window was rather higher than usual, and there were bars across it. When it became dark, a paraffin-lamp, such as is now universal in the country‚ÅÝ‚Äîsmelling horribly, as is, alas! too universal also‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas brought in, giving abundance of light, but making everything more squalid than before. And as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny made his notes, John‚Äôs heart sank, and his impatience rose. He got up and began to pace about like a wild beast in a cage, as he said to himself. The sensation was more extraordinary than can be imagined. Not to be able, whatever might happen, to leave this shabby room. Whosoever might call to you, whatsoever might appeal to you, to be fixed there, all your impulses checked, impotent, unable for the first time in your life to do what you had done every day of your life, to move out and in, to and fro as you pleased! John felt that if he had been a theatrical felon in a play, manacled and fettered, it would have been easier, more comprehensible. But to know that these four walls were his absolute boundaries, and that he could not go beyond them, was more astounding than any other sensation that had ever happened to him in his life. And when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny, with his careful brow, weighted with doubts and fears, unable to clear his countenance from the disapprobation that clouded it, got up to take his leave, and stood holding his client‚Äôs hands, overwhelmed with sympathy, vexation, dissatisfaction, and pity, the impatience and bitter sense of the intolerable in John‚Äôs mind could scarcely be restrained. ‚ÄúWhatever there may be more to say, whatever may come to your mind, you have but to send me a word, and I‚Äôll be at your call night or day,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is very unlikely that I should have anything more to say,‚Äù said John; ‚Äúbut must I stay here?‚Äù It seemed incredible to him that he should be left even by his own ‚Äúman of business.‚Äù He had seen Beaufort go away with a sort of contemptuous certainty of speedy liberation; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny had said nothing about liberation. ‚ÄúSurely there is nothing to prevent bail being accepted?‚Äù he said, with an eagerness he could not disguise.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will see about it,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMonypenny said. But the good agent went away with a dissatisfied countenance; and with a feeling that he must break through the walls or the barred window, must make his escape somehow‚ÅÝ‚Äîcould not, would not, endure this extraordinary intolerable new thing‚ÅÝ‚ÄîJohn Erskine heard the key turn in his door, and was left shut up with the paraffin-lamp, flaming and smelling more than ever, a prisoner and alone. Whether it was more ludicrous or more terrible, this annoying impossible farce-tragedy, it was hard to say.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
