<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
			<p>The party at Tinto was increased by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling and his wife, which made six, instead of four as the master of the house had intended. His meaning, so far as it was a meaning at all and not a mere impulse, was to get John Erskine by himself, and with skilful art to worm himself into the confidence of that openhearted young man. Torrance had a great opinion of his own skill in this way. He thought he could find out from any man the inmost thoughts of his mind; and John seemed an easy victim, a young fellow without suspicion, who might without difficulty be led into betraying himself. Torrance had been overawed by the presence of Edith, and forced into conviction when his wife appealed to her sister on the subject of John; but he was without any confidence in the truth of others, and after a time he began to persuade himself that Lady Car’s denial was not final, and that probably he should find out from John himself something that would modify her tale. When he heard that his wife had added to the party, he was furious. “I never said I wanted more people asked,” he said. “If I had wanted people asked, I should have let you know. What do I want with a country parson, or minister, or whatever you call him? When I’m ill you can send for the minister. I’ve got nothing to say to him at present. It is for yourself, of course, you want him. When there’s nobody better, he does to try your arts on, Lady Car.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Lady Car, with a faint smile, “I allow that I like to talk to him⁠—for lack of a better, as you say.” Sometimes she had spirit enough to be what he called aggravating, and Torrance grew red with a sense of scorn implied. He was not stupid enough, seeing that he was so little clever. He knew so much as to be constantly conscious that he was below the mark.</p>
			<p>“Confound it!” he said, “if you were to talk to your husband, it would show more sense; but of course that would not answer your purpose.” Why it would not answer her purpose he had not any idea; but it is not always necessary, especially in controversy, to know what you yourself mean, and Carry did not inquire. Sometimes she was aggravating, but sometimes she showed the better part of valour, and held her peace. That was always the wise way. And accordingly there were six people who sat down to the banquet at Tinto. It was truly a banquet though the party was so small. The table was covered with plate, huge silver epergnes, and loads of old-fashioned metal⁠—not old-fashioned, it must be recollected, in the right way, but in the wrong way⁠—monstrosities of the age of William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> or of the last George. Lady Caroline’s taste had been quite inoperative so far as these ornaments were concerned. Her husband knew that she made light of them, and this usually influenced him in the long-run. But he knew also what they had cost, and would not yield a hair’s-breadth. The table groaned under them as on the greatest feast-days; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling, if nobody else, was always deeply impressed. “I tell the Doctor it’s as good as reading a book upon the East to see that grand camel and the silver palm-trees,” this excellent lady said. She thought it became a minster’s wife to show a special interest in the East.</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s not often they’re seen in the east⁠—of Scotland, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling,” said Tinto, with his large laugh. He had made the joke before.</p>
			<p>“Oh fie, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance! ye must not be profane,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling said: and they both laughed with a certain zest. Very few of Lady Car’s guests admired the palm-trees; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling, by a blessed dispensation of Providence, was always capable of this effort. “I hear they are not much in the way of art,” Torrance said⁠—“people are ill to please nowadays; but they’re pure metal, and if they were only valued at so much an ounce⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You may well say they’re ill to please. Bless me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance! one of them would be a fortune⁠—just a fortune at that rate. When my little Jeanie is of an age to be married you must lock up these fine things, or there’s no saying what I might be tempted to; but you never would miss one when there’s so many,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling said. It was a dispensation of Providence. The Doctor himself devoutly wished he had his wife’s faculty of admiration, when, after keeping her host in good humour all the evening, she withdrew with Lady Car, giving him a warning glance. All three of the ladies addressed warning glances to the gentlemen left behind. Even Nora, who had not spoken three words to John, and had, as she said almost spitefully to herself, nothing whatever to do with him, could not help warning him with her eyes to keep the peace.</p>
			<p>Now this was the time which Torrance had looked forward to, when he should cross-examine the newcomer, and get to the rights of the story respecting John’s previous acquaintance with his wife. He was balked and he was angry, and all at once it became apparent to him that this was Lady Car’s design, and that she had done it to screen herself. “Doctor, you like a good glass of wine,” he said; “all parsons do, whatever be the cut of the cloth. Here’s some stuff that will soon lay you under the table⁠—unless you’re seasoned like Erskine here, and me.”</p>
			<p>“I must take care, then, to give that stuff a wide berth,” the Doctor said gravely, yet with a smile.</p>
			<p>“Ay, ay, but you must drink fair. We’ll be having you take shelter with the ladies. I don’t mean to let Erskine off so easy. This is his first dinner in my house. It ought to have been a state dinner, you know⁠—all the bigwigs in the county; but Erskine and Lady Car are old friends. I think you knew the family intimately at⁠—where was the place?”</p>
			<p>“I met Miss Lindores, as she was then, in Switzerland,” said John, curtly. “It was to you that I was to apply, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling, for particulars about the asylum Lord Lindores is so much interested in.”</p>
			<p>“And a most important work,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling. “It is a strange thing to think of in a country so well gifted as this by Providence, and with so much intelligence, what a balance we have on the other side! You’ll have noticed almost every village has a ‘natural’ as the people call them⁠—a half-witted innocent creature like Davie Gellatley in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Waverley</i>.”</p>
			<p>“What did you say was the name of the place?” said Torrance. “I’m bent on making notes of all the places Lady Car’s been in. She’s a poet, you know. Some time or other they will be wanted for her biography, don’t you see?”</p>
			<p>“I have observed,” said John, answering Torrance only with a little bow⁠—“I have noticed already one or two. Could nothing be done for them?”</p>
			<p>“But you don’t answer me,” said Torrance, “and when I tell you my motive! That’s my father-in-law’s last fad. What is he so anxious about the daft folk for, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling? Is it a fellow-feeling?” He stopped to laugh, making the table ring. “He was at me for my support, and to write to the convener. Not I! I told him they had done well enough up to my time, and they would do well enough after my time. What are we to put ourselves about for? can you tell me that?”</p>
			<p>“It is a disgrace to the county,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling. “No wonder the Earl was horrified, that has seen things managed so differently. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine, if you will come and see me, I will tell you all about it. Sir John stands out, just because the idea is new to him, not from any real objection⁠—for he’s a good man and a charitable man at heart.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t wonder at me, Doctor,” said Torrance. “Do you think I’m not a good man or a charitable? I’m standing out too. I’m saying, what should we put ourselves about for? It’s not us that makes them daft. And what’s done for the county up to our time may do now. Little Tam, he can see to that: let him have the paying of it; it is not an amusement I’m fond of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And yet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance,” said the Doctor⁠—“and yet⁠—you’ll excuse me⁠—here’s what would almost build the place⁠—”</p>
			<p>This was an exaggeration. It was founded upon his wife’s naive admiration of the Tinto plate; but it did not displease the proud owner of all those pounds of silver. He laughed.</p>
			<p>“You may take your word, it will never build the place, nor any such place,” he said. “No, Doctor, that’s not my line⁠—nor the Earl’s either, trust me. If you think he would strip his table or empty his purse for all the idiots in Scotland, you’re mistaken. You think it’s all benevolence and public spirit. Not a bit! He means to run Rintoul for the county, and it’s popularity he’s wanting. There’s always wheels within wheels. My father-in-law thinks he’s a very clever man⁠—and so he is, I suppose. They’re a clever family; but I can see through them, though they don’t think much of me.”</p>
			<p>Torrance had already consumed a good deal of wine. He had been crossed in his purpose, and his temper roused. His dark face was flushed, and his light eyes staring. Both his companions were men entirely out of sympathy with him, who were there because they could not help it, and who listened rather with angry shame that they should be parties to such discourse, than with any amiable desire to cover his shortcomings. They did not look at each other, but a slight uneasy movement on the part of both was as good as a mutual confidence, and both began to speak at once, with an anxious attempt to put an end to these unseemly revelations.</p>
			<p>“What fine weather we’ve been having for the crops!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling. And, “I wish you’d tell me what flies you use about here. I have had no luck at all on the river,” cried John.</p>
			<p>But their host was on his mettle, and felt himself a match for them both. “As for the weather, I’ve no land in my own hands⁠—not such a fool! and I don’t care a ⸻ that for the crops! Flies! you may have the finest in the world, but without sense you’ll make nothing of them. Come with me, and I’ll let you see how to make them bite. But as I was saying,” Torrance went on, elevating his voice, “if you think his lordship is bent on the good of the county, you’re mistaken, I can tell you. He means to get the seat for Rintoul. And who’s Rintoul, to represent a county like this? A boy, in the first place⁠—not fledged yet; what I call fledgling. And knows nothing about what we want. How should he? He never was in the county in his life till four or five years ago. You would have thought a man like old Lindores, that has been about the world, would have had more sense. That’s just it; a man knocks about these little foreign places, and he thinks he knows the world. Now there’s me. I would not take the trouble of Parliament, not for any inducement. It’s no object to me. I prefer quiet and my own way. There’s nothing that any Ministry could give me, neither office nor rise in life. I’m content to be Torrance of Tinto, as my father was before me: but at all events, I am one that knows the county and its ways. I could tell them what’s wanted for Scotland. But no! a boy like Rintoul that knows nothing⁠—without sense or experience⁠—he’s the man. My father-in-law, for so clever as he is, has awful little sense.”</p>
			<p>“There is no seat vacant as yet,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling; “we might leave that question, Tinto, till the time comes.”</p>
			<p>“That’s your old-fashioned way,” said Torrance; “but his lordship is a man of his century, as they call it. He’ll not wait till the last moment. He’ll get himself known as the friend of Liberal measures, and all that. All his tools are in the fire now; and when the time comes to use them, they’ll be hot and handy.” Then he laughed, turning his eyes from one to another. “You’re his tools,” he said.</p>
			<p>It was not possible for either of the listeners to conceal the irritation with which they received this sudden shot. They looked at each other this time with a sudden angry consultation. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Stirling touched his empty glass significantly with the forefinger of one hand, and held up the other as a warning. “It seems to me,” he said, “that it would be an excellent thing about this time of the night to join the ladies. It will very soon be time for my wife and me to go.”</p>
			<p>“He is afraid of his wife, you see, Erskine,” said Torrance, with his laugh. “We’re all that. Keep out of the noose as long as you can, my lad. You may be very thankful for what you’ve missed, as well as what you’ve got.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose you mean something by what you are saying, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance,” said John, “but I do not understand what it is.”</p>
			<p>Upon this Torrance laughed louder than before. “He’s confounded sly⁠—confounded sly. He’ll not let on he knows⁠—that’s because you’re here, Doctor. Join the ladies, as you say⁠—that is far the best thing you can do⁠—and Erskine and I will have a glass more.”</p>
			<p>“A great deal better not, Tinto,” said the Doctor; “you know it’s not the fashion now: and Lady Caroline will wonder what’s become of us. It’s a little dark down the avenue, and my wife is nervous. You must come and shake hands with her before she goes.”</p>
			<p>Both the guests rose, but the master of the house kept his seat. “Come, Erskine, stay a bit, and tell me about⁠—about⁠—what was the name of the place? Let the Doctor go. He has his sermon to write, no doubt, and his wife to please. Go away, Doctor, we’ll join you presently,” Torrance said, giving him a jocular push towards the door. “Come, Erskine, here’s a new bottle I want your opinion of. If you ever drank a glass of claret like it, it will be a wonder to me.”</p>
			<p>John stood hesitating for a moment. Then he took his seat again. If he was to quarrel with this fellow, better, he thought, to have it out.</p>
			<p>“You want to question me,” he said; “then do so simply, and you shall have my answer. I am unaware what the point is; but whatever it is, speak out⁠—I do not understand hints. I am quite at your service if I can furnish you with any information.</p>
			<p>“Go away, Doctor,” said Torrance, with another push. “Tell them we’re coming. I’ll be in time to shake hands with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling: join the ladies⁠—that’s the right thing to do.”</p>
			<p>The minister was in a great strait. He stood looking from one to another. Then he went out slowly, closing the door softly behind him, but lingering in the anteroom, that if any conflict of voices arose, he might be at hand to interfere. Torrance himself was sobered by the gravity of the proceeding. He did not speak immediately, but sat and stared at the companion with whom he was thus left tête-à-tête. He had not expected that John would have courage to meet this interrogation; and notwithstanding his pertinacity, he was disconcerted. Erskine met his gaze calmly, and said, “You wanted to ask me some questions. I am quite at your disposal now.”</p>
			<p>“Question?⁠—no, not so much a question,” faltered the other, coming to himself. “I’m sure⁠—I beg your pardon⁠—no offence was meant. I asked⁠—for information.”</p>
			<p>“And I shall be glad to give you any I possess.”</p>
			<p>Torrance made a pause again; then he burst out suddenly⁠—“Hang it, man, I didn’t mean to give you any offence! I asked you⁠—there couldn’t be a simpler question⁠—what was the name of the place where⁠—you met my⁠—you met the Lindores⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The place was a mountain inn on the way to Zermatt⁠—a very secluded place. We were there only about six weeks. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lindores (then) and his family were very friendly to us because of my name, which he knew. I suppose you have some ulterior meaning in these questions. What is it? I will answer you in all respects, but I ought to know what it means first.”</p>
			<p>Torrance was entirely cowed. “It means nothing at all,” he said. “I daresay I am an idiot. I wanted to know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“We were there six weeks,” repeated John⁠—“an idle set of young men, far better pleased with mountain expeditions than with our books. We did little or nothing; but we were always delighted to meet a family-party so pleasant and friendly. There we parted, not knowing if we should meet again. I did not even know that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lindores had come to the title. When I found them here it was the greatest surprise to me. I had never even heard⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Erskine,” cried Torrance⁠—by this time he had drank several more glasses of wine, and was inclined to emotion⁠—“Erskine, you’re an honest fellow! Whoever likes may take my word for it. You’re an honest fellow! Now my mind’s at rest. I might have gone on suspecting and doubting, and⁠—well, you know a man never can be sure: but when another fellow stands up to him honest and straightforward⁠—” he said, getting up to his feet with a slight lurch towards John, as if he would have thrown himself upon his shoulder; and then he laughed with a gurgle in his breath, and thrust his arm through that of his reluctant guest. “We’re friends for life,” said Torrance; “you’re an honest fellow! I always had a fancy for you, John Erskine. Letsh join the ladies, as that old fogy of a Doctor said.”</p>
			<p>The old fogy of a Doctor, who had been hanging about in alarm lest he might be called upon to stop a quarrel, had no more than time to hurry on before them and get inside the drawing-room door, before the master of the house pushed in, still holding John by the arm. “Here,” Torrance cried, depositing his unwilling companion suddenly with some force in a chair by Lady Caroline’s side⁠—“here, talk to her! You can talk to her as much as you please. An honest fellow⁠—an honest fellow, Lady Car!”</p>
			<p>Then he made a somewhat doubtful step to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling, and stood over her diffusing an atmosphere of wine around him. Poor ladies! in the drawing-room, even in this temperate age, how often will a man approach them, and sicken the air in their clean presence with fumes of wine! The minister’s wife was tolerant of the sins of the squires; but she coughed, poor soul, as she was enveloped in these powerful odours.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling,” Torrance said, with cumbrous liveliness, “your husband here, we could not get him away from his wine. We’ve been doing nothing but talk of coming upstairs this quarter of an hour; but get the Doctor to budge from his wine⁠—no! that was more than we could do,” and he ended with a loud guffaw. The Doctor’s wife coughed, and smiled a sickly smile upon the great man, and shook her head with a “Fie, William!” at her husband. “Dear me, dear me!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling said after, as she walked down the avenue with her Shetland shawl over her head, holding close by her husband’s arm, “when I think of poor Lady Caroline, my heart’s sore. That muckle man! and oh, the smell of him, William! You’re not so particular as you should be in that respect, the best of ye⁠—but I thought I would have fainted with him hanging over me. And that fragile, delicate bit woman!” “She should not have married him,” the Doctor said, curtly. But his wife was a merciful woman; and she did not feel sure how far a girl would have been justified in refusing such a marriage. She shook her head, and said, “Poor thing!” from the bottom of her heart.</p>
			<p>“I am glad I have met with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance’s approval,” John said; but Carry gave him so wistful a deprecating look, that he was silent. And he had not yet escaped from his uncomfortable host. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stirling went away with her husband, Torrance, whose sole idea of making himself agreeable to a woman was by rough banter, transferred himself with another lurch to Nora. “And how’s the old soldier?” he said. “I suppose he’s going over all the men within fifty miles to see who will make the best husband, eh? It was all I could do to keep out of their hands when I was a bachelor. If they had had their will, Lady Car would never have had the chance of me: no great harm in that perhaps, you will say. But you must not be saucy, Miss Nora. Men are not so easy to get when all’s said.”</p>
			<p>“No, indeed,” said Nora⁠—“men like you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance. I could not hope, you know, to be so lucky as Lady Car.”</p>
			<p>Upon this, though his head was not very clear, the uneasy Laird grew red, fearing satire. It was perfectly true, to his own thinking; but he was enlightened enough to know that Nora had another meaning. He would have liked to punish the little saucy chit, who held up (he thought) her little face to his so disdainfully in his own house. As lucky as Lady Car, indeed! She should have no luck at all, with that impudence of hers. It would serve her right if she never got the offer of any man. But he dared not say exactly what he thought. Conventional restraints, in such a case, were too much for the freeborn wit even of Pat Torrance of Tinto.</p>
			<p>“That’s a great compliment to me, no doubt,” he said; “but never be downhearted. There is as good fish in the sea as ever came out of the net. There’s our neighbour here, for instance,” he said, stooping to speak confidentially, and jerking his thumb over his shoulder at John, with one of his usual bursts of laughter. “Now, what do you think of him, Miss Nora? A real honest fellow, I can testify, and a nice little property. What do you think of him?”</p>
			<p>The tone was meant to be confidential, but it was loud enough to have reached any ear in the room; and it was Nora’s turn to redden with anger intolerable. She jumped up, while he stood and laughed, shaking his sides. “I’ve given her a poser there,” he said. “I’ve given her her answer there.” He could not help returning to it, as, much against Nora’s will, he accompanied her to the door and put her into the little pony-carriage which had come for her. “You must think of what I say, Miss Nora. You would be very comfortable. You’ll see that’s what the old soldier is driving at. And I don’t think you could do better, if you’ll take my advice.”</p>
			<p>John, who had followed downstairs, not wishing to have any more than he could avoid of his host’s society, saw the indignant countenance of Nora looking out wrathfully upon himself as the carriage turned from the door. What had he done to deserve the angry look? But the other, standing somewhat unsteadily on the steps, greeted the departure with a laugh that was loud and long.</p>
			<p>“One good turn deserves another,” he said. “I’ve put her against you, Erskine, and that’s the best thing I could do. Mind what you’re about, my fine fellow, or you’ll fall into some snare or other. I would not marry, if I were you. You have enough for one, but it wouldn’t be enough for two. If you manage Dalrulzian well, you may be very comfortable as an unmarried man. Take my advice. Of course they will all be setting their caps at you. There’s Aggie Sempill⁠—she thought she had got me: but no, I knew better. Truly in vain is the snare set in the sight of any bird. There! you’ve Scripture for it. And now here’s Nora Barrington⁠—”</p>
			<p>John grasped his arm violently. “Be silent!” he cried in his ear. The butler stood on the steps behind laughing decorously under his breath, as in duty bound, at his master’s joke. John’s new groom at his horse’s head grinned respondent. What he would have given to take the big clown by the collar and fling him into the midst of the bushes! But this was not to be thought of. Such violent impulses have to be repressed nowadays.</p>
			<p>“Well, well, we’ll name no names,” said Tinto. “They’ll all be after you; no need to name names. And I’ll tell them all you’re an honest fellow. Don’t you be led away by his lordship, no more than the women. Keep your vote to yourself, and your heart to yourself, that’s my advice. Good night to you, John⁠—you’re a very decent fellow,” cried the big voice in the darkness. Torrance had found out that this epithet annoyed young Erskine, and he liked it all the better in consequence. He shouted it after him into the night, as with another great laugh he went back into his house to Lady Car. Alas, poor Carry! The others went away, shook off the disagreeable presence, got out of the atmosphere of his wine and the roar of his laugh; but Carry, than whom there was no more fastidious, delicately nurtured woman⁠—Carry sat helpless, scared, awaiting him. Whatever happened, she could not run away.</p>
			<p>As for John, he flew down the avenue in the dark, taking that turn on the top of the scaur, which was allowed by everybody to be so dangerous, without knowing anything about it, guided by instinct and rage; for he had never been there before. When they had passed the danger, Peter, the groom, drew a long breath. “That’s past, the Lord be thankit!” he said. It was natural that Peter should suspect his master of sitting long after dinner, and sharing the excitement of his host.</p>
			<p>“What’s past?” said John, angrily: he had nearly taken an inner gate, dogcart and all, as if it had been a fence. His horse was fresh, and his mind ablaze with irritation and impatience. “What’s past?” he repeated, angrily, when the man clambered up again to his side.</p>
			<p>“That corner, sir, they call the Scaur. There used to be a paling, but it fell to pieces, and this Laird⁠—I beg your pardon, sir⁠—young Tinto, that is a perfect deevil when he’s on a horse, would never let it be mended. It’s a’ cleared away, and there’s a grand view when there’s daylicht to see it, and doun-bye the sound o’ the river roaring. If it werena for the horse’s feet and the rate we’re going, you would hear it now.”</p>
			<p>“You think we’re going too fast⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Na⁠—no me,” said the groom, cautiously, “now that I see, sir, you ken what’s what. But it’s a fickle corner in the dark. Not to know is maybe the best way. When you ken, you’re apt to be ower cautious or ower bold⁠—one’s as bad as the ither. A wrang step, a bit swing out on the open, and there would be no help for ye. Neither you nor me, sir, would have seen a freend belonging to us again.”</p>
			<p>“It is unpardonable,” said John, “if this is so, to leave it without protection or notice.”</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, you see it’s no just the richt road. It’s a shortcut. You take the left hand at thae lily-oaks. I thought you bid to ken, as you took it so bold, without a moment’s thought. I wouldna advise you to do it again. Tinto, he’s a perfect deevil on horseback, as I was saying. He’s aye riding that way. They say he’ll break his neck sometime or other, he’s so wild and reckless⁠—ower that scaur⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And no such great loss either,” cried John, in his indignation. He hoped the words were not audible, in the rush of his horse’s hoofs and jingle of the harness, the moment they had left his lips; and he was annoyed by the confidential tone of Peter’s reply.</p>
			<p>“Maybe no, sir. There’s plenty is of that opinion. There was mair tint at Shirramuir.”</p>
			<p>John felt as if he had condescended to gossip with his servant about his neighbour, and was ashamed of himself. But as he reviewed the events of the evening his pulses beat higher and higher. That he should have pleased this big bully, and received the offer of his friendship, was something half humiliating, half ridiculous. But what could he do? The bonds of neighbourhood are stringent: that you must not, if possible, quarrel with, or markedly avoid, or put any slight upon, the man whose lands march with your own, is a self-evident proposition. And the husband of Carry Lindores! When John thought of this part of it, there escaped from him an almost groan of horror and pity. The rest of the party had dispersed, and were free of the big laugh, the rude jests, the fierce staring eyes; but Carry remained behind.</p>
			<p>Peter the groom did not feel so sure that his new master had partaken too freely of the wine at Tinto, which everybody knew to be better and stronger than wine anywhere else, by the time they got to Dalrulzian. But he announced that he was “just one of Tinto’s kind, a deevil when he’s behind a horse,” as he took his supper. This, however, was a suggestion which brought down upon his head the indignant displeasure of Bauby, who regretted audibly that she had kept the potatoes hot for such an ill-speaking loon⁠—and of Rolls, who, accepting the praise implied, put down the superficial judgment of this newcomer as it deserved. “There will no man beat an Erskine for clear head and steady hands,” he said, “if that’s what you ca’ being of Tinto’s kind; but you’ll observe, my lad, that we’re a’ of a reasonable age, and I’ll have nane o’ your rash opinions here.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
