<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>
			<p>It was late when John Erskine got home on the afternoon of this eventful day. John Tamson’s wife mended his coat for him, and he got himself brushed and put in order; then his excitement calming down, he walked slowly home. He argued with himself as he walked, that to take any further notice of Torrance’s violence would be unworthy of himself. The fellow had been drinking, no doubt. He had been stung in his tenderest point⁠—his pride in his fine house and tawdry grandeur⁠—he had felt himself altogether out of place in the little company, which included his nearest connections. Not much wonder, poor wretch, if he were twisted the wrong way. John forgave him as he grew calmer, and arriving at home, tired out, and somewhat depressed in mind, began at last to feel sorry for Pat Torrance, who never had been framed for the position he held. The first thing he found when he arrived, to his alarm and dismay, was a telegram from Beaufort announcing his arrival that very night. “Obliged to come; cannot help myself,” his friend said, apologetic even by telegraph. Nothing could well have been more unfortunate. John felt as if this arrival must put a gulf between him and Carry’s family altogether⁠—but it was too late now for any alteration, even if he could have, in the circumstances, deserted his friend. Perhaps, too, in the crisis at which he had arrived, it would be well for him to have some one upon whom he could fall back, some one who had been more unfortunate than himself, to whom he could talk, who would understand without explanation, the extraordinary crisis to which his history had come. It was not his doing, nor Edith’s doing⁠—they had not sought each other: no intention had been in her mind of making a victim of her rural neighbour; no ambitious project in his, of wooing the Earl’s daughter. Everything had been innocent, unwitting. A few meetings, the most innocent, simple intercourse⁠—and lo! the woe or weal of two lives was concerned. It seemed hard that so simply, with so little foresight, a man might mar his happiness. John was not a sentimentalist, determining that his whole existence was to be shattered by such a disappointment. He repeated to himself, with a little scorn⁠—</p>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Man’s love is of man’s life a thing apart.”<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>But the scorn was of the sentiment, and not any protest against the application of it to his own case. The broken tie between Beaufort and Carry was not an example of that superficial poetic deliverance. He himself was not like Beaufort, nor Edith like her sister. She would never marry a man whom she could not love; nor would he allow himself to dally with all the objects of life, and let everything slip past him. But he knew what would happen, he said to himself in the quietness of the silent hours. Life would lose its crown altogether. He would “get on” as if nothing remarkable had befallen him⁠—but the glory and the joy would be over without ever having been his. And if she shared his feelings, there would be the same result on her side⁠—her life would be lonely like his, the flower of existence would be stolen from her. Only⁠—if it were possible that Edith did share his feelings, then there was still something to be done⁠—there was a fight for it still before them. He would not give in like Beaufort, nor she take any irremediable step of desperation like Carry. This stirred him a little and restored him to himself; but on the whole, despondency was his prevailing feeling⁠—a sense of impossibility, the sensation as of a blank wall before him, which it was impossible to surmount.</p>
			<p>He had a lonely dreary evening. His dinner was served to him by one of the maids, who was frightened and lost her head, Rolls still being absent, to the great alarm of the household. Bauby, who did not remember the time when her brother had thus forsaken his duties, had been so disturbed in her preparations by anxiety, that it had almost happened to John as to King Louis, that he had to wait for his meal. “I canna gie my mind to my denner. Whaur’s Tammas?⁠—and who’s to take ben the dishes?” Bauby cried. When the housemaid, arrayed in her best cap and apron, and with what she herself called “a red face,” blushing like a peony in the unusual responsibility and honour, had managed to fulfil the service of the table, Bauby went out to the kitchen-door and then to the avenue to watch. “Something’ll have happened to him,” she said, drying her eyes. “Na, na, he’s no’ the man to forget himself. It’s been something he couldna avide. The Lord grant it’s no deadly⁠—that’s a’ I say. We’ve never had an accident in oor family, no’ since my grandfather that tummeled down the Broken Brig and broke himself a’ to bits, and walkit wi’ a crutch ever aifter.” Bauby had got the length of despair by the time the dogcart came up the avenue bringing “the gentleman” from the station, whom Marget the housemaid, once more tying on her best apron, and looking in the glass to see if she had not yet got rid of that “awfu’ red face,” prepared to attend upon. It was at this moment, when Bauby found it required her whole attention to keep her tears from dropping upon the bird, which was cooked to a turn for Beaufort’s supper, that a sudden welcome voice made her jump and almost drop the savoury morsel. “Eh, Tammas! what I’ve gaen through this nicht!” she cried. “I thought you were drowned in the water, or a’ your banes broken.” “Hold your peace,” said Rolls, with a gloomy countenance; “nothing has happened to me.” And he took the tray out of Marget’s hands without a word. The women stood aghast to see him so scowling, dark, and uncommunicative, proceeding thus into the presence of his master, without any attention to his dress. “Without your claes!” Bauby said. “Hold your peace,” repeated her brother. And he paused as he went out of the kitchen and turned round solemnly, “We have all a hantle mair to think of this night than my claes.” The solemnity of this address, it is needless to say, made an enormous impression upon the maids, who were wont to consider Rolls, next to the minister, as one of the greatest lights of the parish. Andrew the gardener came in soon after on some domestic errand, and from him they heard something of what had happened at Tinto. “I’m no’ sure what but the maister here is in it,” Andrew said. “You gomeril! how can <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John be in it, and him biding quiet at hame, and no’ looking the gait Pat Torrance was on?” “Aweel, I’m saying, I ken naething about it, but that something’s happened to Tinto and his muckle mear⁠—and the maister’s into it,” Andrew replied.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Rolls had carried in the supper. The library where John always sat was cheerful with light and fire. The farther north the traveller goes, the more sure he is, with or without occasion, to find a fire. It scarcely enters into the Italian’s idea of comfort at all, though he shivers with cold⁠—but it is indispensable to a Scotsman’s, though it may be warm. The night was soft and mild, the windows wide open, but the ruddy glow made everything cheerful, and John Erskine had brightened to meet his visitor: he was sitting cheerfully in the light, asking Beaufort the hundred questions with which a man a little withdrawn from society assails one who has kept within it. Beaufort himself was older and graver: a man with a fine picturesque head, somewhat long; a forehead exceptionally white, from which the hair had begun to wear off a little round the temples; a slightly feeble querulous drop of the lip under his moustache. He was very tall, very slim, with long white hands, which clasped each other in a nervous habitual motion. Neither the one nor the other took any notice of Rolls. They were in full flood of talk about old associations, for they had not met for years. Rolls made his preparations very deliberately, almost rubbing against his master on repeated occasions as he went and came. Three or four times over John drew his chair out of the way, a little surprised, but paying no particular attention. When this happened, however, for the fifth or sixth time, he looked up impatiently. “What are you after?” he cried. Rolls looked at him with a steady meaning gaze, his eyes staring, his mouth rigid⁠—he shook his head slightly, very slowly. “What’s the matter?” cried John. Beaufort had seated himself at the table, and had begun his meal. The others were in the shade behind him, between the fireplace and the door.</p>
			<p>“There’s much the maitter, sir⁠—much the maitter,” said Rolls; “more than will be made up for this many a day.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean? What is it? You look as if something had happened with which I had to do,” John said, half alarmed, half amused. The only answer Rolls gave was to shake his head once more very gravely as he turned away. His look spoke all that he did not say. Tragedy was in it, and horror, and pity, and reproach. John grew excited in spite of himself. “Hey, here Rolls! <em>Rolls</em>, I say! What is the meaning of this?” he cried. Rolls opened the door slowly, solemnly, and disappeared. “Confound the fellow!” cried John, and rose hastily and followed, with a hurried word to Beaufort. “I suppose the mare has fallen lame, or there is a tile off the roof,” he said, half laughing. Rolls was standing in the partial gloom outside the door. The hall door was open, and the whole darkness of the night showing beyond. Over their heads hung the lamp, flickering in the night air, throwing its light upon the impenetrable blackness opposite to it in the open doorway, but leaving the two figures in shadow below. Rolls stood as if he expected his master. He left him no time to ask any question, but said at once, “Yon was death, sir,” in a low and solemn tone.</p>
			<p>“Yon! What was death? I don’t understand you,” John cried, in wonder and alarm. “Quick, quick! tell me what you mean.”</p>
			<p>“It’s but ower easy to tell;⁠—yon was death. He’s never stirred. Horse and man one heap, and no’ a breath or a tremble in it. It’s easy⁠—easy to tell.”</p>
			<p>“Good God! Rolls, what do you mean? Not⁠—not the Scaur⁠—not⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I mean,” Rolls replied almost sternly. “A bonnie morning’s work. Just Tinto, poor fellow, with all his faults, and, maybe, the drink in him that made it easy. Dead⁠—dead.”</p>
			<p>There was a sort of guttural sob in the old man’s voice. His heart was wrung, not for Tinto, but with a deeper and closer horror. But John neither thought nor understood this. He fell back a step and leaned against the wall in horror and bewilderment. “Good God!” he repeated with pale lips, with that instinctive appeal which we make without knowing it in the face of every mystery. Under any circumstances, the suddenness and terribleness of the event would have appalled him; but now, at this moment, with Beaufort under his roof!⁠—he could only gasp for breath⁠—he could not speak. And he was not aware how eagerly Rolls was noticing every look and gesture, and how his agitation struck the old servant to the heart. He asked a few further questions in profound horror and dismay, then went back to his friend with a ghastly countenance, shaken to the bottom of his heart. The very consciousness that behind this sudden and terrible death stood life, added to the effect. He went back to tell Beaufort of it. That was indeed his first intention, but second thoughts presented to him the embarrassing nature of such a communication at the very moment of his friend’s arrival. Beaufort did not notice⁠—being occupied with his supper⁠—the pallor and agitation which had produced so great an effect upon old Rolls. But after a while, as John said nothing, he turned half round and said, “I hope nothing serious has happened to the mare⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The mare⁠—Oh yes, it was something very serious⁠—not to be made a jest of. A fatal accident has happened⁠—to one of my neighbours. It is appalling in any case to hear of anything so sudden; but what makes it worse is, that I spent some part of to-day in his company. It is not above four or five hours since I parted with him. We had even a little altercation,” said John, with a slight shudder. “There’s a bitter lesson for you! To quarrel with a man without a thought of any harm, and a little while after to hear that he is dead, with an unkind thought of you in his heart, and you with hard thoughts of him!”</p>
			<p>Beaufort answered gravely and sympathetically as became such an announcement. “Was he a man you liked? Was he a friend?”</p>
			<p>“No: neither a friend nor a man I liked, but young and strong; such a frame of a man!⁠—worth you and me put together; and to think that in a moment⁠—”</p>
			<p>“How did it happen?” Beaufort asked.</p>
			<p>“I scarcely asked. He must have fallen, he and his horse, down a precipice⁠—the Scaur⁠—a place he had often been cautioned against, I believe. Good heavens! to think of it! I thought he must have gone over as we spoke.”</p>
			<p>And John got up and walked about the room in his excitement. This interrupted altogether the lively flow of conversation with which they had begun the evening. There were one or two attempts made to resume it. But Erskine relapsed in a few moments either into exclamations of dismay, or into restless and uncomfortable silence of thought. The fact was, not only that Torrance’s sudden death had startled his imagination and awoke some compunctions in his mind, as in that of Lady Lindores, but that it opened to him a whole confusing sea of speculations and possibilities. It was extraordinary that on the very day which should see this happen, Beaufort had arrived. And what would Lady Caroline now say⁠—she who, with such self-betraying emotion, had entreated John to keep his friend away? What might happen now were they to meet? John shrank from the suggestion as from an impiety, and yet it would come back. It was evident to Beaufort that his friend was out of sorts and profoundly agitated. He withdrew early to his room, pleading that he was tired, to leave John to himself. It did not concern him (Beaufort) to be sure, but it must, he felt, touch Erskine more than he was willing to show. And it was a relief to John to be alone. His mind, left to itself, pursued the question, not so much of the dead as of the living. He did not call back Rolls to question him on the accident as he had intended to do; for it was Carry he thought of, not poor Torrance, after the first moment. What would Carry do? What would she think when she found, in the first moment of her freedom, Beaufort so near? The idea overwhelmed him. There seemed a certain indelicacy and precipitancy in the thought. He had risen in his restlessness and opened the window, as he had been in the habit of doing, to breathe the freshness of the night air, when Rolls came in, pale, and with a harassed stealthy look. He came up to his master, and seeing that he was not observed, touched him on the arm. “If you are going out, sir, to take a walk⁠—or that,” he said, with quivering lips, “I’ve brought you a coat and some haps⁠—”</p>
			<p>John looked at him with surprise. The old man was grey and ghastly; his lip quivered. He had a dark coat carefully folded over his arm, several comforters and a plaid. There was a tremor in his whole figure, and his eyes had a wild look of inquiry and fear.</p>
			<p>“Take a walk! Why should I take a walk at this time of night?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m no’ saying: gentlemen has strange fancies. I’m not one to pry. I’ll put the haps here, in case you should want them. You’ll find a drop brandy in your flask, and a few sandwiches in the pocket,” he added in an undertone.</p>
			<p>“Sandwiches! You must be taking leave of your senses. Where do you suppose I should want to go?”</p>
			<p>“I would rather not know, sir,” said Rolls, solemnly turning away. “What good would it do me to know? I’ll not listen nor look. I have nothing ado with it; but oh, if you’ll take my advice, go⁠—go out of harm’s way.”</p>
			<p>“I believe you are mad, Rolls.”</p>
			<p>“I have plenty to make me sae, at the least of it,” Rolls said, and putting down the coat ostentatiously on a chair, he hobbled out of the room, closing the door carefully behind him. John could hear his steps going stealthily up-stairs to the window in the gallery above, where they seemed to pause, and the window was carefully opened. A wild bewilderment seized upon his mind. Of what was it that the old servant was afraid?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
