<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXVIII</h2>
			<p>This extraordinary interruption put a stop at once to the struggle between the father and daughter. They both came to a sudden pause, not only in their conversation, but in their thoughts, which were suspended instantly by the breaking in of something more urgent. “What is it? What has happened?” they both cried in a breath; and Edith, after a moment, added, “Carry⁠—there is something wrong with Carry,” scarcely aware what she said.</p>
			<p>Rintoul came to the table on which stood a crystal jug of water. He filled himself out a large glass and drank it. He was in a tremor which he attempted to conceal from them, though with no success. Then he said, “There is nothing the matter with Carry; but a dreadful accident has happened,”⁠—and stopped, his mouth being parched, his very articulation difficult.</p>
			<p>“What is it? what is it? The children?⁠—”</p>
			<p>Rintoul turned his face away from Edith and directed himself towards his father. He made a great effort over himself, as if what he had to say was almost beyond his powers. Then he said with a strange hoarseness of voice, “Torrance⁠—has been killed.”</p>
			<p>“Torrance!⁠—killed! Good God! Rintoul.”</p>
			<p>“It is so. Instantaneous, they say. He cannot have suffered much, thank God.”</p>
			<p>Rintoul was not emotional or used to show very much feeling, but the lines of his face were drawn and his lips quivered as he spoke.</p>
			<p>“Killed! But how did it happen? where? Was it accident, or⁠—For heaven’s sake tell us all!” cried his father. Edith stood by struck dumb, yet with a host of sudden rising thoughts, or rather images, in her breast. It was to her sister that her mind suddenly reverted, with a perception of everything involved so clear and vivid that her very spirit was confused by the distinctness of her sight.</p>
			<p>“Accident,” said Rintoul almost with a stammer, stumbling on the word. “He must have been riding home by the Greenlaws road, which was his favourite way. He and his horse were found at the foot of the Scaur. The brute must have reared and lost its footing. The ground was soft with the rain. That’s all that any one knows.”</p>
			<p>“And he is dead? Good God!”</p>
			<p>A shiver came over Rintoul. Who would have thought he had so much feeling? and concerning Torrance, whom he had never been able to endure. “It’s dreadful,” he said in a low tone; “but it’s true. One moment never to be recalled, and that big fellow with all his strength⁠—O Lord, it’s terrible to think of it. It has taken all the strength out of me.”</p>
			<p>Edith hurried to him, trembling herself, to clasp his arm in hers and soothe her brother. She was almost too much excited and agitated to be aware that he repulsed her, though unconsciously, but this increased the general impression of pain and horror on her mind. There was so strong a thrill of agitation in him that he could not bear to be touched or even looked at. He put her away, and threw himself down into the nearest chair. A hundred questions were on the lips of both; but he looked as if he had said all that was possible⁠—as if he had no power to add anything. Lord Lindores, after the first pause of horror, of course pursued his inquiries, and they gathered certain details as to the way of finding “the body,” and the manner in which horse and man seemed to have fallen. But Rintoul evidently had been too much impressed by the sight to be able to dwell on the subject. He wiped the perspiration from his forehead, and took again large draughts of water as he brought forth sentence after sentence. “Get me some wine, or brandy, or something⁠—I am done,” he cried; but when his father rang the bell, Rintoul recoiled. “Let Edith fetch it; don’t let us have any prying servants about here.” “There is no reason why we should be afraid of prying servants,” said Lord Lindores, with surprise and disapproval. “It is not a matter to be concealed. I suppose there is nothing to conceal?” “Oh no, no,” said Rintoul, with a groan⁠—“nothing to be concealed; you can’t conceal a dead man,” and he shuddered, but added directly, raising himself to meet his father’s eye, “it was accident⁠—nothing but accident⁠—everybody has warned him. I said myself something was sure to happen sooner or later at the Scaur.” Edith, who had flown to bring him the wine he asked for, here came back with it, having sent away the officious butler, anxious to hear all about it, who hovered near the door. Her brother took the decanter from her hand without a word of thanks, and poured out the wine lavishly, but with a shaking hand, into the glass from which he had been drinking water. It brought a little colour back into his cheeks. To Edith the emotion he showed was a new revelation. She had never expected from Rintoul so much tenderness of feeling. But Lord Lindores went on with his questions.</p>
			<p>“Something sure to happen? Yes⁠—to children or people incapable of taking care of themselves; but Torrance, who knew it all like his own hand! had he⁠—been drinking, poor fellow?”</p>
			<p>“Not that I know of; but how can I tell? Nobody knows.”</p>
			<p>“Some one must have seen him before the accident happened. There must be some one who can tell. Of course everything must be investigated. Where had he been? Why was he not with you, when you went by appointment to see the place? It was surely very extraordinary⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He was with us at first,” said Rintoul, “but he took offence at some of Millefleurs’s criticisms; and then John Erskine⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What had John Erskine to do with it?”</p>
			<p>“They had some words. I can’t remember; something passed. Erskine left early too. Now that I think of it,” said Rintoul, suddenly, “Erskine must have gone that way, and perhaps⁠—But no, no; I mistake⁠—they did not meet.”</p>
			<p>“They had no words,” said Edith, eagerly; “there was no quarrel, if that is what you mean. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance was annoyed because Lord Millefleurs⁠—But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine had nothing to do with it,” she added, her colour rising. Lord Lindores paced up and down the room, stopping at every turn to ask another question. Rintoul sat leaning his head upon his hand, his face concealed by it; while Edith, to whom this reference had given animation, stood between them, her senses quickened, her mind alert. But they were both too deeply occupied to notice the change in her which was made by the mention of this name.</p>
			<p>“Of course there must be a thorough investigation into all the circumstances,” Lord Lindores said.</p>
			<p>“Who can do that? I thought there were no coroners in Scotland?” said Rintoul, rousing himself. “I was thinking, indeed, what a good thing for poor Carry to be spared this. Besides, what can investigation do? He went off from among us excited. Very likely, poor fellow, he had been drinking. He rode off in haste, thundering down that dangerous road, as was his custom. Everybody knows it was his custom. It was his way of blowing off steam. Coming back, the road was soft with the rain, and he still excited and in a nervous state. He pushed Black Jess a step too close. She reared, and⁠—I don’t know what you can find out more by any investigation.” Rintoul wiped his forehead again and poured himself out more wine.</p>
			<p>“That may be, but there must be an investigation all the same,” said Lord Lindores. “A man of importance like poor Torrance does not disappear like this in a moment without any notice being taken of it. If he had been a ploughman, perhaps⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here the door was opened hastily, and Lady Lindores hurried in. “What is this?” she cried; “what is this I hear?⁠—the servants are full of it. Something about Torrance and a bad accident. What does it mean?”</p>
			<p>Edith ran to her mother, taking her by the arm, with the instinct of supporting her against the shock; and Lord Lindores gave her the information, not without that almost pleasure in recounting even the most terrible news, which is the instinctive sentiment of those whose hearts are not deeply concerned. Lady Lindores heard it with horror⁠—with the instant and keen self-question as to whether she had done justice to this man, of whom no one now could ask pardon⁠—whose wrongs, if he had any, could never be remedied⁠—which, in a generous mind, is the first result of such a tragedy. Out of keen excitement and horror she shed a few tears, the first that in this house at least had been expended on the dead man. A pang of wondering pity was in her heart. The sight of this softer feeling stilled the others. She arrested every other sentiment in a natural pause of terrified compassion. She who had never called him by it in his life, suddenly found his Christian name come to her lips: “Oh, poor Pat! poor Pat! like that⁠—in a moment⁠—with his home close by that he was so proud of, and all his good things⁠—summoned in a moment. O God, have mercy upon him!” she cried.</p>
			<p>“It is too late for that,” said Lord Lindores, gravely, for the moment ashamed of all other questions. “Short as the time is, and dreadful as it is to think of it, his account must be made by this time. It is a terrible lesson to us all⁠—”</p>
			<p>“O God, have mercy upon him! I cannot think it is ever too late for that,” cried Lady Lindores through her tears. And there was a pause. She did not, so far as we know, entertain any heterodox ideas about the after state; but nature spoke in her, which is stronger than creeds. And they were all silent, ashamed to have thought of anything else than this. Rintoul still sat with his head hid in his hands. He had not looked at his mother. He did not say anything to help out the narrative which his father, of course, had given minutely. He had made a great effort to get over his personal agitation and the tremor of his nerves, but he was not used to such violent emotions, and it was hard to get them under control.</p>
			<p>Then Lady Lindores rose from the chair upon which she had sunk in the first shock. “I must go to Carry at once,” she said. “Poor Carry! how must she be feeling? In a moment⁠—without time for a word⁠—”</p>
			<p>Now at this there was a slight movement on the part of the two men⁠—even in Rintoul, though he was so much overcome. They thought it was the usual feminine hypocrisy. Carry had never pretended to be a fond or loving wife. The shock was great, but it brought her deliverance. A touch of indignation and of wonder at what they considered that incomprehensible female nature, which one moment brought them back by sheer natural tenderness to a loftier state of feeling, and the next disgusted them with mere conventionalism and make-believe, stirred in their minds. They durst not say anything, for of course it was needful to the world to keep up this fiction, and take it for granted that Carry was heart-broken; but in their hearts they despised the false sentiment, as they thought it. Nobody understood that divine compunction in Lady Lindores’s heart⁠—that terrible and aching pity for the unworthy on her own part⁠—that sense of awful severance from a human creature with whom there had been nothing in common, with whom there could be no hope of reunion, which, she felt, must be in her daughter’s mind. God help poor Carry! What could she be but glad to be free? Her mother’s heart bled for her in this awful satisfaction and misery. Meanwhile her husband rang the bell and ordered the carriage for her, with a sensation not quite unlike contempt, though he was pleased, too, that she should be able to keep up the natural superstitions, and go through all traditional formalities so well. He made a pause, however, when he found Edith hastily preparing to go too.</p>
			<p>“There is Lord Millefleurs to be thought of? What am I to do,” he said, “with Millefleurs?”</p>
			<p>“At such a moment surely everything of the kind must be suspended,” said Lady Lindores. “You cannot think that Edith could⁠—go on with this⁠—while her sister⁠—”</p>
			<p>Millefleurs himself made his appearance on the stairs while she was speaking. It was a curious scene. The great hall-door was open, the night wind blowing in, making the light waver, and penetrating all the excited group with cold. Lady Lindores, wrapped in a great cloak which covered her from head to foot, stood below looking up, while Edith paused on the lower steps in the act of tying a white shawl about her head. The servants, still more excited, stood about, all anxious to help, by way of seeing everything that was going on. Rintoul stood in the doorway of the library, entirely in shadow⁠—a dark figure contrasting with the others in the light. To these actors in the drama came forth Millefleurs in his exact evening costume, like a hero of genteel comedy coming in at the height of the <i>imbroglio</i>. “I need not say how shocked and distressed I am,” he said, from his platform on the landing. “I would go away at once, but that would not help you. Never think of me; but I feel sure you would not do me the injustice to think of me in presence of such a catastrophe.”</p>
			<p>Lady Lindores waved her hand to him as she hurried out, but he overtook Edith on the stairs. It was impossible that he should not feel that she knew all about it by this time; and after all, though he was so humble-minded, Millefleurs was aware that the heir of a great Duke is not usually kept in suspense. “Lady Edith,” he said in an undertone, “should I go away? I will do what you think best.”</p>
			<p>He had faded entirely out of her mind in the excitement of this new event. “Lord Millefleurs⁠—Oh, I cannot tell,” she said; “it will be painful for you in the midst of this horror and mourning⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You cannot think that is what I mean,” he said anxiously. “If I could be of any use; a cooler person is sometimes of use, don’t you know⁠—one that can sympathise and⁠—without being overwhelmed with⁠—feeling.”</p>
			<p>“We shall not be overwhelmed. Oh, you have seen, you know, that it is not so much grief as⁠—It is Carry we all must think of⁠—not⁠—poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance. I am sorry⁠—I am sorry with all my heart⁠—but he did not belong to us, except by⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Marriage⁠—that is not much of a tie, is it?” said little Millefleurs, looking at her with a mixture of half-comic ruefulness and serious anxiety. “But this is not a moment to trouble you. Lady Edith, do you think I may stay?”</p>
			<p>At this moment her mother called her from the door, and Edith ran hastily down the steps. She scarcely knew whether she had said anything, or what she had said. It was only “Oh,” the English ejaculation which fits into every crisis; but it was not “No,” Lord Millefleurs said to himself, and he hastened after her to close the carriage-door, and bid Lady Lindores good-night. As the carriage drove off he turned and found himself in face of Lord Lindores, who had a somewhat anxious look. “I have been asking if I should go or stay,” he said; “I know your hospitality, even when you are in trouble⁠—”</p>
			<p>“There is no trouble in having you in the house, even in the midst of this calamity; but what did they say to you?” asked Lord Lindores.</p>
			<p>“Nothing, I think; but I will stay if you will let me, Lord Lindores, till we can see. And may I hear the details of the accident⁠—if it was an accident.”</p>
			<p>“You think there is something more in it?” cried Lord Lindores, quickly.</p>
			<p>“No; how can I tell? I should like to hear everything. Sometimes a looker-on, who is not so much interested, sees more of the game, don’t you know.”</p>
			<p>“It is a tragic game,” said Lord Lindores, shaking his head; “but there is no agrarian crime here, no landlord-killing, no revenge. Poor Torrance had not an enemy, so far as I know.”</p>
			<p>All this time Rintoul stood motionless in the doorway, concealed by the shadow; but here he seemed piqued to speak. “He had plenty of enemies,” he said hastily. “A man of such a temper and manners, how could he help having enemies?”</p>
			<p>“De mortuis nil nisi bonum,” said his father⁠—“say no harm of the dead⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is all very well; but it is of more importance to do no injustice to the living,” said Rintoul, with a sort of sullen solemnity; and he suddenly gave place to the others and went off in the direction of his own den, a little room in which he smoked and kept his treasures. Lord Lindores took his guest into the library, gravely apologetic. “I have never seen Rintoul so upset; his nerves seem to have received a shock. I don’t think he cares to go over the melancholy story again.”</p>
			<p>“It is very natural,” said little Millefleurs. “A man who has been always at home, who has never roughed it in the world, naturally loses his head when he first comes in contact with tragedy, don’t you know. I did myself in California the first time I touched actual blood. But that was murder, which is a different sort of thing.”</p>
			<p>“Very different,” said Lord Lindores; and he proceeded to satisfy his guest with an account of all the particulars, to which Millefleurs listened very seriously. He had the Scaur described to him with much minuteness, and how it might be possible that such an accident could happen. Instinctively Lord Lindores made it appear that the wonder was it had not happened before. “I warned poor Torrance repeatedly,” he said; although he had in equal good faith expressed his amazement that such a thing could happen to a man who knew the place so well, only a short time before. Millefleurs listened to everything very gravely, giving the profoundest attention to every detail.</p>
			<p>The house was full of agitation and excitement, and Lord Lindores sent repeatedly for his son to consult with him over what ought to be done; but Rintoul was not to be found. He had gone out, the servants said; and the general impression was that he had returned to Tinto, though he could only have done that by a long walk through the gloomy night. Millefleurs went out into the grounds while this question was proceeding. He had a great many things to think about. He lit his cigar and wandered about, thoughtfully discussing with himself various questions. Did Edith mean that he should stay? Had he any right to stay in the circumstances of the family? He had a strong desire to do so that was not entirely connected with Edith. To be sure, the suspense in which he was kept, the impossibility of addressing her at such a moment, would have made a passionate lover very restless; but Millefleurs was not the sort of stuff out of which passionate lovers are made. He thought Edith would make him a delightful wife, and that with such a wife he would be a very happy man; but he did not feel that heaven and earth would be changed to him without Edith, and therefore other motives were free to come in. He had something in his mind which for the moment almost obliterated all thoughts of her. He walked up and down in the darkness, turning it over and over in his mind. Vaguely, one way or another, this thought was associated with Edith too. After some time he perceived another red spark in the darkness, and became aware of some one else smoking like himself a thoughtful cigar. He called out to Rintoul and came upon him at the end of an alley. Millefleurs had an internal conviction that Rintoul wished to avoid him, so he went up to him quickly and caught him by the arm.</p>
			<p>“It was thought that you had gone back to Tinto,” he said, putting his arm familiarly through his. He had to reach up on tiptoe to do it, but this was what pleased Millefleurs.</p>
			<p>“What! walking at this time of night? I am not so eager about it,” said Rintoul. “Besides, what should I do there? Everything is settled so far as it can be for to-night, and my mother and Edith have gone to Carry: there is no need for me.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you would tell me all about it, my dear Rintoul.”</p>
			<p>“Didn’t my father tell you?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, in his way; but that is different. You want the details from an eyewitness, don’t you know. You want to see it through the eyes that have seen it. I have a great curiosity about that kind of thing ever since I have been in California, where it is an incident of everyday life.”</p>
			<p>“It is not an incident of everyday life here, and I’m sick of it,” cried Rintoul. “Don’t question me any more⁠—it’s too terrible. It must have been instantaneous they say; that is the only comfort about the business⁠—everything else is hideous from beginning to end.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, from the beginning⁠—that is just what I want to talk to you about,” said Millefleurs.</p>
			<p>He felt a thrill in the arm he held, and an inclination as if to throw him off, but he was not to be thrown off; he was small but very tenacious, and clung to his hold.</p>
			<p>“That is what I want to know. The beginning. Did he meet any one? had he any dispute or altercation in the wood?”</p>
			<p>“None that I know of,” said Rintoul. He spoke sulkily, almost in an undertone, so that Millefleurs had to concentrate his attention upon the voice, which was interrupted by all the sounds in the air, the rustling of the trees, the sough of the river far away.</p>
			<p>“Did you see any one about?” said Millefleurs.</p>
			<p>The two men were in the dark⁠—they could not see each other’s faces, yet they stopped and looked at each other, anxiously, suspiciously, each at the red end of the other’s cigar, which disclosed a moustache, a shadow above.</p>
			<p>“Any one about? I don’t think there was any one about,” said Rintoul, still more sullenly. “What should put that into your mind? You were not there?”</p>
			<p>This was a curious question, but Millefleurs made no note of it, his mind being possessed by an entirely different idea. He said, “No, I was not there. I drove home with your mother, don’t you know. To think we should have passed without the least knowing it, the place which so soon was to be the scene of such a tragedy.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t romance about it. It’s bad enough as it is. You did not pass the scene. It was on the other road, a long way from yours.”</p>
			<p>“At which side?”</p>
			<p>“The left side,” said Rintoul, carelessly. “I wish, if you don’t mind, that you would change the subject. My nerves are all wrong. I didn’t know I was such a feeble beggar. I’d rather not dwell upon it, if you don’t mind.”</p>
			<p>“The left side?” said Millefleurs, with a sigh⁠—and then there was a pause. “You are quite sure,” he added anxiously, “that you did not see any one in the wood?”</p>
			<p>Rintoul almost thrust this question away. “I tell you I won’t be questioned,” he said. Then, composing himself with an effort, “I beg your pardon, Millefleurs⁠—I never liked the man, though he was my brother-in-law; and to see all at once a fellow whom perhaps you had been thinking badly of two minutes before, wishing no good to⁠—to see him lying there stiff and stark⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beg you a thousand pardons, Rintoul,” Millefleurs said gravely. And they went in together, saying no more.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
