<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
			<p>There are few things in human affairs more curious than the structure of what is called society, wherever it is met with, whether in the most primitive of its developments or on the higher levels. The perpetual recurrence of a circle within which the sayings and doings of certain individuals are more important than anything else in earth or heaven, and where the conversation persistently rolls back, whatever may be its starting-point, to what this or that little knot of people are doing, to the eccentricities of one and the banalities of another, to some favourite individual scene of tragedy or comedy which forms the centre of the moral landscape⁠—is always apparent to the observer, whether his observations are made in Kamtchatka or in London, among washerwomen or princesses. But under no circumstances is this so evident as to a newcomer in a region where all the people know each other. The novelty and freshness of his impressions perhaps make him congratulate himself for a moment that now at last he has got into a society fresh and original, with features of its own; but half-a-dozen meetings are enough to prove to him that he has only got into another round, a circle as little extended, as much shut up in its own ring, as all the rest. This was what John Erskine found, with a little amusement and a little disgust, almost as soon as he got settled in his unknown home. Any addition to their society was interesting to the country folks, especially in May, when there is not much doing⁠—when those who can indulge themselves in the pleasures of the season have gone to London, and those who cannot are bound to bring forth their philosophy and prove that they enjoy the country in the early summer, even though there is nothing to do. But a young man unencumbered and alone, with all his life before him, and all his connections to form, is perhaps of all others the most interesting human creature who can come into a new sphere. All the world is curious about him⁠—both those whose lives he may influence, and those to whom he can contribute nothing but the interest, perhaps of a new drama, perhaps only of a new face. He who will enact his own story publicly before the eyes of his neighbours, falling in love, wooing, marrying, or, still better, carrying on these processes with interruptions of non-success and threatenings of postponement, what a godsend he is! and perhaps scarcely less he who brings in darker elements into the placid tenor of the general history, and ruins himself for our instruction, while we all look on with bated breath. To the countryside in general, John Erskine, while as yet unknown, was a new hero. He was the beginning of a romance with all the more fascination in it that the most interested spectator for a long time could form but little idea how it was to turn. As soon as he was known to be at home, his neighbours came down upon him from all quarters with friendly greetings, invitations, offers of kindness on all sides. The first to appear was Sir James Montgomery, a sunburnt and cheerful old soldier, whose small estate of Chiefswood “marched” on one side with Dalrulzian, and who was disposed to be very friendly. He came in beaming with smiles over all his brown jovial countenance, and holding out a large cordial hand.</p>
			<p>“Well, young man, so this is you at last. You’re heartily welcome home. I’ve been long away myself, and you’ve never been here, but we’re old neighbours for all that, and I take it upon me to call myself an old friend.”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind,” John said, suffering his hand to be engulfed in that kind, warm, capacious grasp. The old soldier held him at arm’s length for a moment, looking at him with friendly eyes.</p>
			<p>“I remember your grandfather well,” he said; “not so much of your father, for he came to man’s estate, and died, poor lad, when I was away; but I see some features of the old man in you, my young friend, and I’m glad to see them. You’ll seldom meet with a better man than your grandfather. He was very kind to me as a young lad at the time I got my commission. They were ill able to afford my outfit at home, and I’m much mistaken if old Dalrulzian did not lend a helping hand; so mind you, my lad, if young Dalrulzian should ever want one⁠—a day in harvest, as the proverb goes⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind, sir,” said John Erskine again: he was touched, but half amused as well. It seemed so unlikely that he should require the old general’s helping hand. And then they talked of the country, and of their previous lives and diverse experiences. Sir James was one of those primitive men, much more usual a generation ago than now, whose knowledge of life, which to his own thinking was profound and extensive, left out the greater part of what in our days is known as life at all. He knew Scotland and India, and nothing more. He was great in expedients for dealing with the natives on one hand, and full of a hundred stories of village humour, fun, and pawkiness on the other. To hear him laugh over one of these anecdotes till the tears stood in his clear, warm blue eyes, which were untouched by any dimness of time, was worth all the witticisms ever printed; and to see him bend his fine old brows over the characteristics of his old subjects in India, and the ameliorations of character produced by British rule, firmness, and justice, was better than philosophy. But with that which young John Erskine knew as life he had no acquaintance. Save his own country and the distant East, the globe was wrapped in dimness to him. He had passed through London often, and had even transacted business at the Horse Guards, though an Indian officer in those days had little to do with that centre of military authority; but he had a mingled awe and horror of “town,” and thought of the Continent as of a region of temptation where the devil was far more apparent than in other places, and sought whom he might devour with much more openness and less hindrance than at home. And when our young man, who flattered himself a little on his knowledge of society and the world, as he understood the phrase, unfolded himself before the innocent patriarch, their amazement at each other was mutual. Old Sir James contemplated John in his knowledge with something of the same amused respect which John on his side felt for him in his ignorance. To each there was in the other a mixture of a boy and a sage, which made them each to each half absurd and half wonderful. An old fellow, who must have seen so much to have seen so little! and a mere bit of a lad, Sir James said to himself, who knew nothing about India or anything serious, yet had seen a vast deal, and had very just notions, and spoke like a man of the world when you came to talk to him! It was thus the senior who did most justice to the junior, as is usually the case.</p>
			<p>“I am afraid,” Sir James said, “that you’ll find our countryside but dull after all you’ve seen. We’re pleased with ourselves, as most ignorant people are; we think we’re good enough company on the whole, but music, or the play, or art, or that kind of thing, you’ll find us wanting in. I’m afraid they find us very wanting at Lindores; but as for a kind welcome, whenever you like and however you like, and a good Scotch dinner, and sometimes a dance, if that will content you in the way of company⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I should be hard to please if that would not content me,” said John. “I hope you will give me the chance.”</p>
			<p>“That we will⁠—that we will,” said Sir James, heartily; and then he added, “we have no young people about us⁠—Lady Montgomery and me. Our two children are as far from children now as their father and mother. They are both in India, and their families grown up and gone out to them. So we have nothing young of our own about the house; but don’t go too fast, we’re not without attraction. In a week, I think, we’re expecting a visitor that will make the place bright⁠—Miss Barrington⁠—Nora Barrington; you’ll have heard of her by this time. She’s a great favourite in the country. We are all keen to have her and to keep her. I’m not afraid that a young man will find us dull when we’ve Nora in the house.”</p>
			<p>Here John, who had become suspicious of the name of this girl whom everybody insisted on recommending to him, eagerly protested that he should want no foreign attraction to the house in which the kind old general was.</p>
			<p>“Foreign! No, she’s not foreign,” said Sir James; “far from that. A bonnie English girl, which, after a bonnie Scotch lassie, is by far the best thing going. We must stand up for our own first,” said the old soldier, laughing; “but nothing foreign⁠—nothing foreign: if you want that, you’ll have to go to Lindores.”</p>
			<p>John felt⁠—he could scarcely tell why⁠—slightly irritated by these references to Lindores. He said, somewhat elaborately, “They are the only people I really know in the county. I met them long ago⁠—on the Continent.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!⁠—ay; that’s just what I say⁠—for anything foreign, you’ll have to go to the Castle,” said Sir James, a little doubtfully. “But,” he added, after a moment’s pause, “I hope you’ll take to us and your own country, and need no ‘foreign aid of ornament,’ eh? You must forgive me. I’m an old fellow, and old-fashioned. In my time it used to be thought that your French and Italians were⁠—well, no better than they should be. Germans, they tell me, are a more solid race; but I know little difference⁠—I know little difference. You’ll say that’s my ignorance,” said this man of prejudice, beaming upon his companion with a smile in which there was a little deprecation, but a great deal of simple confidence. It was impossible not to condone the errors of a censor so innocent.</p>
			<p>“If you knew them, you would not only see a great deal of difference, but I think you would like them a great deal better than you suppose,” John said.</p>
			<p>“Very likely⁠—very likely,” cried Sir James. It occurred to him suddenly that if his young friend had indeed, poor lad, been brought up among those “foreign cattle,” an unfavourable opinion of them might hurt his feelings; and this was the last thing the old man would have done⁠—even to a foreigner in person, much less to a son of the soil temporarily seduced by the wiles of strangers. And then he repeated his formula about being an old fellow and old-fashioned. “And you’ll mind to expect nothing but broad Scotch at Chiefswood,” he cried, laughing and waving his hand as he rode away, after the hearty invitation with which every visitor ended. “You’ll get the other at Lindores.”</p>
			<p>And the door had scarcely closed upon this new acquaintance when the Earl made his appearance, with the smile of an old friend, quite willing to acknowledge old relationships, but not too familiar or enthusiastic in his claim. He was no longer the languid gentleman he had been in the old wandering days, but had the fresh colour and active step of a man who lived much out of doors. “The scene is very different,” he said, with kindness but dignity. “We are all changed more or less; but the sentiments are the same.” He said this with something of the air of a prince graciously renewing acquaintance with a friend of his exile. “I hope we shall see you often at the Castle. We are your nearest neighbours; and when you have been as long here as we have, you will have learned to shudder at the words. But it is a relief to think it is you who will now fill that role.” Could a benevolent nobleman say more? And it was only after a good deal of friendly talk that Lord Lindores began to speak of the county business, and the advantage it would be to him to have support in his attempts to put things on a better footing.</p>
			<p>“Nothing can be more <i xml:lang="fr">arrièré</i>,” he said. “We are behind in everything; and the prejudices I have to struggle with are inconceivable. I shall have you now, I hope, on my side: we are, I believe, of the same politics.”</p>
			<p>“I scarcely know what my politics are,” said John. “Someone told me the other day that the Erskines are always on the right side; and, if you will not be disgusted, I am obliged to confess that I don’t know what was meant. I know what it would be at Milton Magna. I imagine dimly just the opposite here.”</p>
			<p>The Earl smiled benignly on the young inquirer. “The Erskines have always been Liberal,” he said. “I know there is no counting upon you young men. You generally go too far on one side or the other: if you are not Tories, you are Radicals. My Liberalism, <i xml:lang="fr">bien entendu</i>, does not go that length⁠—no Radicalism, no revolutionary sentiments. In short, at present my politics mean county hospitals and drainage more than anything else.” Then he paused, and added somewhat abruptly, “I don’t know if you ever thought of Parliament⁠—as a career for yourself?”</p>
			<p>At this John’s pulses gave a sudden jump, and the blood rushed to his cheeks. Had he thought of it? He could scarcely tell. As something he might come to, when he had learned the claims of life upon him, and the circumstances of the country, which as yet he barely knew⁠—as an object to look forward to, something that might ennoble his future and afford him the finest occupation that a man can have, a share in the government of his country⁠—yes; no doubt he had thought of it⁠—at a time when he thought more highly of Dalrulzian and of his own pretensions. But the demand was very sudden, and he had all the modesty of youth. “Parliament!” he faltered forth. “I⁠—don’t know that I have thought of it. I fear I know too little of politics⁠—I have too little experience⁠—” And here he paused, expecting nothing less than that he should be kindly urged to think better of it, and persuaded that it was his duty to serve his generation so.</p>
			<p>“Ah,” said the Earl, “you give me just the assurance I wanted. I need not hesitate to tell you, in that case, that my great desire is to push Rintoul for the county. If you had thought of it yourself, it would have been a different matter; but otherwise everything points to him⁠—his position, our circumstances as the natural leaders, and the excellent chance he would have with all parties⁠—better than anyone else, I believe. You could be of the utmost use to us, Erskine, if it does not interfere with any plans of your own.”</p>
			<p>Now John had no plans; but this sudden check, after the sudden suggestion which roused all his ambition, was too much like a dash of cold water in his face to be pleasant to him. But he had time to collect himself while Lord Lindores was speaking, and to call up a sort of smile of assent, though it gave him a twinge of ludicrous pain. It was poetic justice. He had faltered and said No, in order to be encouraged and made to say Yes, and his vanity and false modesty, he thought, had got their reward. And all this for Rintoul! He remembered Rintoul well enough when he was not Rintoul at all, but Robin Lindores⁠—a poor little lieutenant in a marching regiment. And now he was in the Guards, and the heir of an earldom. The change of position was so great, that it took away John’s breath. In the days of their former acquaintance, there could not have been the smallest doubt which was the more important personage⁠—young Lindores, who had nothing at all, or John Erskine, with a good estate which everybody accepted as much better than it was. But now he had gone down, and the other up. All this went through his mind ruefully, yet not without a sense of amusement in his own discomfiture. He had not much confidence in his own abilities or enlightenment, but it was not much to brag of that he had more of both than young Lindores. However, he had nothing to do in this sudden concatenation but to listen respectfully yet ruefully as the Earl went on, who seemed to have grasped him, present and future, in his hands.</p>
			<p>“It is a wonderful comfort to be able to calculate upon you,” he said. “My son-in-law⁠—for of course you have heard of Carry’s marriage⁠—would have a great deal of influence if he chose to exert it; but he has his own notions⁠—his own notions. You will understand, when you make his acquaintance, that though a sterling character, he has not had all the advantages that might have been wished, of acquaintance with men and knowledge of the world. But you, my dear Erskine, you know something of life. By the by,” he said, as he rose to go away, “Lady Lindores charged me to engage you to come to us tomorrow. We are going away to town, but not for more than a month. The ladies insist that they must see you before they go. We all look forward to seeing a great deal of you,” the Earl added, with that manner which was always so fascinating. “Between you and me, our dear neighbours are a set of prejudiced old rustics,” he said, with a confidential smile, as he went out; “but it will be strange if you and I together cannot make them hear reason.” Could anything be more flattering to a young man? And it was the father of Edith who grasped his hand thus warmly⁠—who associated him with himself in a conjunction so flattering. John forgot the little wrench of theoretical disappointment⁠—the ludicrous ease with which he had been made to give place to Rintoul. After all, something must be sacrificed, he allowed, to the heir of an important family⁠—and the brother of Edith Lindores!</p>
			<p>But this was not his last visitor on this eventful afternoon. The Earl had scarcely disappeared when Rolls once more threw open the door of the library, in which John usually sat, and announced with much solemnity <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance of Tinto. The man whom the Earl, though vouching for him as “a sterling character,” had allowed to be wanting in knowledge of the world, came striding in with that air of taking up all the space in the room and finding it too small for him, which wealth and a vulgar mind are so apt to give. That John should dislike him instinctively from the moment he set eyes upon him, was nothing remarkable; for was not he the owner of the most obnoxious house in the neighbourhood? the man to whom Carry Lindores had been sacrificed? John Erskine felt, as he rose to meet the newcomer, a sense of the shabbiness and smallness of his own house, such as, even in the first evening of disenchantment, had scarcely affected him so strongly before. When his visitor cast round him that bold glance of his big, projecting, light-blue eyes, John saw through them the insignificance of the place altogether, and the humility of his own position, with a mortification which he could scarcely subdue. Torrance was tall and strong⁠—an immense frame of a man, with very black hair and dark complexion, and something insufferably insolent, audacious, cynical, in those large, light eyes, <i xml:lang="fr">à fleur de tête</i>. His insolence of nature was sufficiently evident; but what John did not see was the underlying sense of inferiority which his new visitor could not shake off, and which made him doubly and angrily arrogant, as it were, in his own defence. It galled him to recognise better manners and breeding than his own⁠—breeding and manners which perhaps he had found out, as John did the inferiority of his surroundings, through another’s eyes. But Torrance’s greeting was made with great show of civility. He had heard much of John as a friend of the family at Lindores, he said.</p>
			<p>“Not but what I should have called, anyhow,” he explained, “though Tinto really belongs to the other side of the county, and Dalrulzian is rather out of the way for me; but still civility is civility, and in the country we’re a kind of neighbours. I hope you like it, now you are here?”</p>
			<p>“Pretty well,” was all that John said.</p>
			<p>“It’s a nice little place. Of course you knew what it was⁠—not one of the great country places; but it stands well, and it looks fine at a distance. Few places of its size look better when you’re a good bit away.”</p>
			<p>This tried the young man’s patience, but he did his best to smile. “It is well enough,” he said; “I expected no better. It is not imposing like Tinto. Wherever one goes, it seems to me impossible to get out of sight of your big house.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it’s an eyesore to half the county; I’m well aware of that,” said Torrance, with complacency. “There’s far more of it than is any good to me. Lady Car⁠—I hear you knew Lady Car before we were married,” he said, fixing John almost threateningly with those light eyes⁠—“fills it now and then; and when I was a bachelor, I’ve seen it pretty full in September; but in a general way it’s too big, and a great trouble to keep up.”</p>
			<p>“I hope Lady Caroline is quite well?” John said, with formal gravity.</p>
			<p>“She is well enough. She is never what you call quite well. Women get into a way of ailing, I think, just as men get into a way of drinking. You were surprised to hear she was married, I suppose?” he asked abruptly, with again the same threatening, offensive look, which made John’s blood boil.</p>
			<p>“I was surprised⁠—as one is surprised by changes that have taken place years before one hears of them; otherwise it is no surprise to hear that a young lady has married. Of course,” John added, with serious malice, “I had not the advantage of knowing you.”</p>
			<p>Torrance stared at him for a moment, as if doubtful whether to take offence or not. Then he uttered, opening capacious jaws, a fierce laugh.</p>
			<p>“I am very easy to get on with, for those that know me,” he said, “if that’s what you mean. We’re a model couple, Lady Car and I: everybody will tell you that. And I don’t object to old friends, as some men do. Let them come, I always say. If the difference is not in favour of the present, it’s a pity⁠—that’s all I say.”</p>
			<p>To this John, not knowing what answer to make, replied only with a little bow of forced politeness, and nothing more.</p>
			<p>“I suppose they were in a very different position when you used to know them?” said Torrance; “in a poor way enough⁠—ready to make friends with whoever turned up?”</p>
			<p>“It would be very bad policy on my part to say so,” said John, “seeing that I was one of the nobodies to whom Lady Lindores, when she was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Lindores, was extremely kind⁠—as it seems to me she always is.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, kind! that’s all very well: you weren’t nobody⁠—you were very eligible⁠—in those days,” said Torrance, with a laugh, for which John would have liked to knock him down; but there were various hindrances to this laudable wish. First, that it was John’s own house, and civility forbade any aggression; and second, that Tinto was much bigger and stronger than the person whom, perhaps, he did not intend to insult⁠—indeed there was no appearance that he meant to insult him at all. He was only a coarse and vulgar-minded man, speaking after his kind.</p>
			<p>“The fact is, if you don’t mind my saying so, I’m not very fond of my mamma-in-law,” said Torrance. “Few men are, so far as I know: they put your wife up to all sorts of things. For my part, I think there’s a sort of conspiracy among women, and mothers hand it down to their daughters. A man should always part his wife from her belongings when he can. She’s a great deal better when she has nothing but him to look to. She sees then what’s her interest⁠—to please him and never mind the rest. Don’t you think I’m complaining⁠—Lady Car’s an exception. You never catch <em>her</em> forgetting that she’s Lady Caroline Torrance and has her place to fill. Doesn’t she do it, too! She’s the sort of woman, in one way, that’s frightened at a fly⁠—and on the other the queen wouldn’t daunt her; that’s the sort of woman I like. She’s what you call a grand damm⁠—and no mistake. Perhaps she was too young for that when you knew her; and had nothing then to stand on her dignity about.”</p>
			<p>Here John, able to endure no longer, rose hastily and threw open the window. “The weather gets warm,” he said, “though it is so early, and vegetation is not so far behind in Scotland as we suppose.”</p>
			<p>“Behind! I should like to know in what we’re behind!” cried his guest: and then his dark countenance reddened, and he burst into another laugh. “Perhaps you think I’m desperately Scotch,” he said; “but that’s a mistake. I’m as little prejudiced as anybody can be. I was at Oxford myself. I’m not one of your local men. The Earl would like me to take his way and follow his lead, as if I were a country bumpkin, you know. That’s his opinion of every man that has stuck to his own country and not wandered abroad; and now he finds I have my own way of thinking, he doesn’t half like it. We can think for ourselves down in the country just as well as the rest of you.” After he had given vent to these sentiments, however, Torrance got up with a half-abashed laugh. “If you come over to Tinto, Lady Car and I will be glad to see you. We’ll show you some things you can’t see every day⁠—though we are in an out-of-the-way corner, you’re thinking,” he said.</p>
			<p>“I have already heard of the treasures of Tinto,” said John, glad that there was something civil to say.</p>
			<p>Pat Torrance nodded his head with much self-satisfaction. “Yes, we’ve got a thing or two,” he said. “I’m not a connoisseur myself. I know they’ve cost a fortune⁠—that’s about all I’m qualified to judge of. But Lady Car knows all about them. You would think it was she and not I they belonged to by nature. But come and judge for yourself. I’m not a man to be suspicious of old friends.”</p>
			<p>And here he laughed once more, with obvious offensive meaning; but it took John some time to make out what that meaning could be. His visitor had been for some time gone, fortunately for all parties, before it burst upon him. He divined then, that it was he who was supposed to have been poor Carry’s lover, and that her husband’s object was the diabolical one of increasing her misery by the sight of the man whom she had loved and forsaken. Why had she forsaken Beaufort for this rude barnyard hero? Was it for the sake of his great house, which happily was not visible from Dalrulzian, but which dominated half the county with gingerbread battlements, and the flag that floated presumptuous as if the house were a prince’s? Had Carry preferred mere wealth, weighed by such a master, to the congenial spirit of her former lover? It fretted the young man even to think of such a possibility. And the visitors had fretted him each in some special point. They neutralised the breadth of the external landscape with their narrow individuality and busy bustling little schemes. He went out to breathe an air more wholesome, to find refuge from that close pressure of things personal, and circumscribed local scenery, in the genial quietness and freshness of the air outside. How busy they all were in their own way, how intent upon their own plans, how full of suspicion and criticism of each other! Outside all was quiet⁠—the evening wind breathing low, the birds in full chorus. John refreshed himself with a long walk, shaking off his discouragement and partial disgust. Peggy Burnet was at her door, eager to open the gate for him as he passed. She had just tied a blue handkerchief about the pot containing her “man’s” tea, which her eldest child was about to carry. As he sauntered up the avenue, this child, a girl about ten, tied up so far as her shoulders were concerned in a small red-tartan shawl, but with uncovered head and bare legs and feet, overtook him, skimming along the road with her bundle. She admitted, holding down her head shyly, that she was little Peggy, and was carrying her father his tea. “He’s up in the fir-wood on the top of the hill. He’ll no’ be back as long as it’s light.”</p>
			<p>“But that is a long walk for you,” said John.</p>
			<p>“It’s no’ twa miles, and I’m fond, fond to get into the woods,” said Peggy. She said “wudds,” and there was a curious singsong in the speech to John’s unaccustomed ears. When she went on she did not curtsey to him as a well-conditioned English child would have done, but gave him a merry nod of her flaxen head, which was rough with curls, and sped away noiseless and swift, the red shawl over her shoulders, which was carefully knotted round her waist and made a bunch of her small person, showing far off through the early greenness of the brushwood. When she had gone on a little, she began to sing like a bird, her sweet young voice rising on the air as if it had wings. It was an endless song that Peggy sang, like that of Wordsworth’s reaper⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Whate’er the theme, the maiden sang</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if her song could have no ending.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>It went winding along, a viewless voice, beyond the house, along the slopes, away into the paleness of the hilltop, where the tall pine-trunks stood up like columns against the light. It was like the fresh scent of those same pines⁠—like the aromatic peat-smoke in the air⁠—a something native to the place, which put the troubles and the passions he had stumbled against out of the mind of the young laird. He was reconciled somehow to Scotland and to nature by little Peggy’s love for the “wudds,” and the clear ringing melody of her endless song.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
