<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXIII</h2>
			<p>The summer went over without any special incident. August and the grouse approached, or rather the Twelfth approached, August having already come. Every bit of country not arable or clothed with pasture, was purple and brilliant with heather; and to stand under the columns of the fir-trees on a hillside, was to be within such a world of “murmurous sound” as you could scarcely attain even under the southern limes, or by the edge of the sea. The hum of the bees among the heather⁠—the warm luxurious sunshine streaming over that earth-glow of heather-bells⁠—what is there more musical, more complete? These hot days are rare, and the sportsman does not esteem them much; but when they come, the sun that floods the warm soil, the heather that glows back again in endless warmth and bloom, the bees that never intermit their hum “numerous” as the lips of any poet, the wilder mystic note that answers from the boughs of the scattered firs, make up a harmony of sight and sound to which there are few parallels. So Lord Millefleurs thought when he climbed up the hill above Dalrulzian, and looking down on the other side, saw the sea of brilliant moorland, red and purple and golden, with gleams here and there of the liveliest green⁠—fine knolls of moss upon the grey-green of the moorland grass. He declared it was “a new experience,” with a little lisp, but a great deal of feeling. Lady Lindores and Edith were of the party with John Erskine. They had lunched at Dalrulzian, and John was showing his poor little place with a somewhat rueful civility to the Duke of Lavender’s son. Millefleurs was all praise and admiration, as a visitor ought to be; but what could he think of the handful of a place, the small house, the little wood, the limited establishment? They had been recalling the Eton days, when John was, the little Marquis declared, far too kind a fag-master. “For I must have been a little wretch,” said the little fat man, folding his hands with angelical seriousness and simplicity. Lady Lindores, who had once smiled at his absurdities with such genial liking, could not bear them now, since she had taken up the idea that Edith might be a duchess. She glanced at her daughter to see how she was taking it, and was equally indignant with Millefleurs for making himself ridiculous, and with Edith for laughing. “I have no doubt you were the best fag that ever was,” she said.</p>
			<p>“Dear Lady Lindores! always so good and so kind,” said Millefleurs, clasping his little fat hands. “No, dearest lady, I was a little brute; I know it. To be kicked every day would have been the right thing for me⁠—and Erskine, if I recollect right, had an energetic toe upon occasions, but not often enough. Boys are brutes in general:⁠—with the exception of Rintoul, who, I have no doubt, was a little angel. How could he be anything else, born in such a house?”</p>
			<p>“If you think Lindores has so good an effect, Rintoul was not born there,” she said, laughing, but half vexed: for she had not indeed any idea of being laughed at in her turn, and she was aware that she had never thought Rintoul an angel. But Lord Millefleurs went on seriously⁠—</p>
			<p>“Rintoul will despise me very much, and so, probably, will Erskine; but I do not mean to go out to-morrow. I take the opportunity here of breaking the news. If it is as fine as this, I shall come out here (if you will let me) and lie on this delicious heather, watch you strolling forth, and listen to the crack of the guns. No; I don’t object to it on principle. I like grouse, and I suppose that’s the best way to kill them, if you will take so much trouble; but for me, it is not my way of enjoyment. I was not made to be a son of civilisation. Do not laugh, Lady Edith, please; you hurt my feelings. If you take luncheon to the sportsmen anywhere, I will go with you: unless you, as I suppose you will, despise me too.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think it is such a noble thing to shoot birds, Lord Millefleurs.”</p>
			<p>“But yet you don’t dislike grouse⁠—and it must be killed somehow,” said John, somewhat irritated, as was natural.</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, I don’t find fault with you. I see your position perfectly. It is a thing you have always done. It is an occupation, and at the same time an excitement, a pleasure. I have felt the same thing in California with the cattle. But it doesn’t amuse me, and I am not a great shot. I will help to carry your luncheon, if Lady Lindores will let me, and enjoy the spectacle of so many healthy happy persons who feel that they have earned their dinner. All that I sympathise in perfectly. You will excuse me saying dinner,” said Millefleurs, with pathos. “When we got our food after a morning’s work we always called it dinner. In many things I have quite returned to civilisation; but there are some particulars still in which I slip⁠—forgive me. May we sit down here upon the heather and tell stories? I had a reputation once in that way. You would not care for my stories, Lady Edith; you know them all by heart. Now this is what I call delightful,” said little Millefleurs, arranging himself carefully upon the heather, and taking off his hat. “You would say it is lovely, if you were an American.”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean the moor? I think it is very lovely, with all the heather and the gorse, and the burns and the bees. Out of Scotland, is there anything like it?” Edith said.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, in several places; but it is not the moor, it is the moment. It is lovely to sit here. It is lovely to enjoy one’s self, and have a good time. Society is becoming very American,” said Millefleurs. “There are so many about. They are more piquant than any other foreigners. French has become absurd, and Italian pedantic; but it is amusing to talk a foreign language which is in English words, don’t you know.”</p>
			<p>“You are to come back with them to dinner, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine,” Lady Lindores said. She thought it better, notwithstanding her prevailing fear that Millefleurs would be absurd, to leave him at liberty to discourse to Edith, as he loved to discourse. “I hope you are going to have a fine day. The worst is, you will all be so tired at night you will not have a word to bestow upon any one.”</p>
			<p>“I have not too many at any time,” said John, with a glance, which he could not make quite friendly, at the visitor⁠—who was flowing blandly on with his lisp, with much gentle demonstration, like a chemical operator or a <i>prestidigitateur</i>, with his plump hands. Our young man was not jealous as yet, but a little moved with envy⁠—being not much of a talker, as he confessed⁠—of Millefleurs’s fluency. But he had thrown himself at Edith’s feet, and in this position felt no bitterness, nor would have changed places with any one, especially as now and then she would give him a glance in which there was a secret communication and mirthful comment upon the other who occupied the foreground. Lady Lindores preferred, however, that he should talk to her and withdraw his observation from her daughter. Reluctantly, against the grain, she was beginning in her turn to plot and to scheme. She was ashamed of herself, yet, having once taken up the plan, it touched her pride that it should be carried out.</p>
			<p>“I have always found you had words enough whenever you wished to say them,” she said. “Perhaps you will tell me everybody has that. And Lord Lindores tells me you don’t do yourself justice, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine. He says you speak very well, and have such a clear head. I think,” she added with a sigh, “it is you who ought to be in Parliament, and not Rintoul.”</p>
			<p>“That is past thinking of,” John said, with a little heightened colour. He thought so himself; but neither could the party bear a divided interest, nor had he himself any influence to match that of Lord Lindores.</p>
			<p>“You are going to Tinto on Tuesday,” said Lady Lindores, “with the rest? Do you know, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine, my boy has never met his brother-in-law since that evening here, when some words passed. I never could make out what they were. Not enough to make a quarrel of? not enough to disturb Carry⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I do not think so. It was only a⁠—momentary impatience,” John said.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine, I am going to ask you a great favour. It is if you would keep in Rintoul’s company, keep by him; think, in a family how dreadful it would be if any quarrel sprang up. The visit will not last long. If you will keep your eye upon him, keep between him and temptation⁠—”</p>
			<p>John could not help smiling. The position into which he was being urged, as a sort of governor to Rintoul, was entirely absurd to his own consciousness. “You smile,” cried Lady Lindores, eagerly; “you think what right has this woman to ask so much? I am not even a very old friend.”</p>
			<p>“I am laughing at the idea that Rintoul should be under my control; he is more a man of the world than I am.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said his mother, doubtfully, “that is true. He is dreadfully worldly in some ways; but, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine, I wonder if you will disapprove of me when I say it has been a comfort to me to find him quite boyish and impulsive in others? He is prudent⁠—about Edith for example.”</p>
			<p>“About⁠—Lady Edith?” John said, faltering, with a look of intense surprise and anxiety on his face.</p>
			<p>There is no doubt that Lady Lindores was herself a most imprudent woman. She gave him a quick sudden glance, reddened, and then looked as suddenly at the other group: Millefleurs, flowing forth in placid talk, with much eloquent movement of his plump hands, and Edith listening, with a smile on her face which now and then seemed ready to overflow into laughter. She betrayed herself and all the family scheme by this glance⁠—so sudden, so unintentional⁠—the action of one entirely unskilled in the difficult art of deception. John’s glance followed hers with a sudden shock and pang of dismay. He had not thought of it before; now in a moment he seemed to see it all. It was an unfortunate moment too; for Edith was slightly leaning forward, looking at her companion with a most amiable and friendly aspect, almost concealing, with the forward stoop of her pretty figure, the rotund absurdity of his. She smiled, yet she was listening to him with all the absorbed attention of a Desdemona; and the little brute had so much to say for himself! The blood all ran away from John’s healthful countenance to replenish his heart, which had need of it in this sudden and most unlooked-for shock. Lady Lindores saw the whole, and shared the shock of the discovery, which to her was double, for she perceived in the same moment that she had betrayed herself, and saw what John’s sentiments were. Some women divine such feelings from their earliest rise⁠—foresee them, indeed, before they come into existence, and are prepared for the emergencies that must follow; but there are some who are always taken by surprise. She, too, became pale with horror and dismay. She ought to have foreseen it⁠—she ought to have guarded against it; but before she had so much as anticipated such a danger, here it was!</p>
			<p>“I mean,” she faltered, “that she should⁠—meet only the best people, go to the best houses⁠—and that sort of thing; even that she should be perfectly dressed; he goes so far as that,” she said, with an uneasy laugh.</p>
			<p>John did not make any reply. He bowed his head slightly, that was all. He found himself, indeed, caught in such a whirlpool of strange emotion, that he could not trust his voice, nor even his thoughts, which were rushing head-long on each other’s heels like horses broken loose, and were altogether beyond his control.</p>
			<p>“But he is himself as impulsive as a boy,” cried the unlucky mother, rushing into the original subject with no longer any very clear perception what it was; “and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance’s manner, you know, is sometimes⁠—offensive to a sensitive person. He does not mean it,” she added hurriedly; “people have such different degrees of perception.”</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—people have very different degrees of perception,” said John, dreamily; he did not mean it as a reproach. It was the only observation that occurred to him; his mind was in too great a turmoil to be able to form any idea. To think he had never budged from his place at her feet, and that all in a moment this should have happened! He felt as if, like a man in a fairy tale, he had been suddenly carried off from the place in which he was, and was hearing voices and seeing visions from some dull distance, scarcely knowing what they meant.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Millefleurs purled on like the softest little stream, smooth English brooklet, without breaks or boulders. He was never tired of talking, and himself was his genial theme. “I am aware that I am considered egoistical,” he said. “I talk of things I am acquainted with. Now, you know most things better than I do⁠—oh yeth! women are much better educated nowadays than men; but my limited experiences are, in their way, original. I love to talk of what I know. Then my life over yonder was such fun. If I were to tell you what my mates called me, you would adopt the name ever after by way of laughing at me: but there was no ridicule in their minds.”</p>
			<p>“I hope you don’t think I would take any such liberty, Lord Millefleurs.”</p>
			<p>“It would be no liberty; it would be an honour. I wish you would do it. They called me Tommy over there. Now, my respectable name is Julian. Imagine what a downfall. I knew you would laugh: but they meant no harm. I acknowledge myself that it was very appropriate. When a man has the misfortune to be plump and not very tall⁠—I am aware that is a pretty way of putting it; but then, you don’t expect me to describe my personal appearance in the coarsest terms⁠—it is so natural to call him Tommy. I was the nurse when any of them were ill. You have no notion how grateful they were, these rough fellows. They used to curse me, you know⁠—that was their way of being civil⁠—and ask where I had got such soft hands.” Here Millefleurs produced those articles, and looked at them with a certain tenderness. “I was always rather vain of my hands,” he said, with the most childlike <i>naïveté</i>, “but never so much as when Jack and Tim d⁠⸺⁠d them, in terms which I couldn’t repeat in a lady’s presence, and asked me where the something I had learned to touch a fellow like that? It occurred to me after that I might have studied surgery, and been of some use that way; but I was too old,” he said, a soft little sigh agitating his plump bosom⁠—“and then I have other duties. Fortune has been hard upon me,” he added, raising pathetically the eyes, which were like beads, yet which languished and became sentimental as they turned upwards. It was when he spoke of Jack and Tim that Edith had looked at him so prettily, bending forward, touched by his tale; but now she laughed without concealment, with a frank outburst of mirth in which the little hero joined with great good-humour, notwithstanding the pathos in his eyes.</p>
			<p>This pair were on the happiest terms, fully understanding each other; but it was very different with the others, between whom conversation had wholly ceased. Lady Lindores now drew her shawl round her, and complained that it was getting chilly. “That is the worst of Scotland,” she said⁠—“you can never trust the finest day. A sharp wind will come round a corner all in a moment and spoil your pleasure.” This was most unprovoked slander of the northern skies, which were beaming down upon her at the moment with the utmost brightness, and promising hours of sunshine; but after such a speech there was nothing to be done but to go down hill again to the house, where the carriage was waiting. John, who lingered behind to pull himself together after his downfall, found, to his great surprise, that Edith lingered too. But it seemed to him that he was incapable of saying anything to her. To point the contrast between himself and Millefleurs by a distracted silence, that, of course, was the very thing to do to take away any shadow of a chance he might still have! But he had no chance. What possibility was there that an obscure country gentleman, who had never done anything to distinguish himself, should be able to stand for a moment against the son of a rich duke, a marquis, a millionaire, and a kind of little hero to boot, who had been very independent and original, and made himself a certain reputation, though it was one of which some people might be afraid? There was only one thing in which he was Millefleurs’s superior, but that was the meanest and poorest of all. John felt inclined to burst out into savage and brutal laughter at those soft curves and flowing outlines, as the little man, talking continuously, as he had talked to Edith, walked on in front with her mother. The impulse made him more and more ashamed of himself, and yet he was so mean as to indulge it, feeling himself a cad, and nothing else. Edith laughed too, softly, under her breath. But she said quickly⁠—“We should not laugh at him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine. He is a very good little man. He has done more than all of us put together. They called him Tommy in America,” said the traitress, with another suppressed laugh. John was for a moment softened by the “we” with which she began, and the gibe with which she ended. But his ill-humour and jealous rage were too much for him.</p>
			<p>“He is Marquis of Millefleurs, and he will be Duke of Lavender,” he said, with an energy which was savage, trampling down the tough heather under his feet.</p>
			<p>Edith turned and looked at him with astonished eyes. It was a revelation to her also, though for the first moment she scarcely knew of what. “Do you think it is for that reason we like him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine? How strange!” she said, and turned her eyes away with a proud movement of her head, full of indignation and scorn. John felt himself the pettiness and petulance of which he had been guilty; but he was very unhappy, and it seemed to him impossible to say or do anything by which he might get himself pardoned. So he walked along moodily by her side, saying nothing, while Lord Millefleurs held forth just a few steps in advance. Edith bent forward to hear what he was saying, in the continued silence of her companion, and this was a renewed draught of wormwood and gall to John, though it was his own fault. It was with relief that he put the ladies into their carriage, and saw them drive away, though this relief was changed into angry impatience when he found that Millefleurs lingered with the intention of walking, and evidently calculated upon his company. The little Marquis, indeed, took his arm with friendly ease, and turned him with gentle compulsion towards the avenue. “You are going to walk with me,” he said. “An excellent thing in Scotland is that it is never too warm to walk, even for me. Come and talk a little. I have been telling tales about myself. I have not heard anything of you. The first is such an easy subject. One has one’s little experiences, which are different from any one else’s; and wherever there are kind women you find your audience, don’t you know?”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t know,” said John, abruptly. “It never occurs to me to talk about myself. I can’t see what interest anybody can have in things that happen to me. Besides, few things do happen for that matter,” he added, in an undertone.</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow,” said Millefleurs, “I don’t want to appear to teach you, who are a man of much more intelligence than I. But that <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>th a mithtake, I must say it. You can always talk best on the subject you know best. Don’t you find it a great difference coming here after knocking about the world? Yes, I feel it; but society is quite fresh to me, as fresh as California while it lasts. Then I have had my eyes opened as to my duties. My father and mother are as kind as possible. A friend of mine tells me, and I am partly convinced, that to keep them comfortable is my chief business. You are of that opinion too? there is much to be said for it. It belongs to civilisation; but so long as civilisation lasts, perhaps⁠—And so I am going to marry and range myself,” Millefleurs said, with his air of ineffable self-satisfaction, turning up the palms of his fat pink-tinged hands.</p>
			<p>“Really!” John cried, with faint derision, feeling as if this innocent exclamation were an oath. “And the lady?” he added, with a still more fierce laugh.</p>
			<p>Millefleurs gave his arm a little squeeze. “Not settled yet,” he said⁠—“not settled yet. I have seen a great many. There are so many pretty persons in society. If any one of them would ask me, I have no doubt I should be perfectly happy; but choice is always disagreeable. In America also,” he added, with some pathos, “there are many very pretty persons: and they like a title. The field is very wide. Let us take an easier subject. Is Beaufort coming to you?”</p>
			<p>“His answer is very enigmatical,” said John. “I do not know whether he means to come or not.”</p>
			<p>“He is enigmatical,” said Millefleurs. “He is the queerest fellow. What is the connection between him and the family here?”</p>
			<p>This question took John entirely by surprise. It was so sudden, both in form and meaning. He had expected his companion, before he paused, to go on for at least five minutes more. He hesitated in spite of himself.</p>
			<p>“There is no connection that I know of between him and the family here.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, yes, there is,” said Millefleurs, with gentle pertinacity; “think a minute. Erskine, my dear fellow, forgive me, but you must have Beaufort here. If he is not near me, he will lose the confidence of my papa⁠—who will think Beaufort is neglecting his precious son. I speak to you with perfect freedom. Beaufort and I understand each other. I am in no need of a governor, but he is in want of a <i>protégé</i>. Don’t you see? By this arrangement everything is made comfortable. Beaufort understands me. He knows that control is a mistake in my case. He found me and brought me home, because I was already on my way: he keeps me from harm⁠—for what you call harm has no attraction for me, don’t you know. It is only my curiosity that has to be kept in check, and at present I have plenty to occupy that; but my father does not understand all this. Minds of that generation are a little limited, don’t you know. They don’t see so clearly as one would wish them to see. If Beaufort is long away from me, he will think I am in danger⁠—that I may bolt again. Also, it will interfere with Beaufort’s prospects, which the Duke is to take charge of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But this seems to me rather⁠—not quite straightforward on Beaufort’s part,” said John.</p>
			<p>At this little Millefleurs shrugged his plump shoulders. “It is permitted to humour our elders,” he said. “It pleases them and it does no one any harm. Beaufort, don’t you know, is not a fellow to walk alone. He is clever and all that; but he will never do anything by himself. Between him and me it suits very well. So, to save the Duke’s feelings and to help Beaufort on, you must stretch a point and have him here. It will be thought he is watching over me at a little distance like the sweet little cherub, don’t you know, in the song. What objection have they got to seeing him here?”</p>
			<p>“None that I know of,” said John steadily, turning his face to the other side to escape the scrutiny of those small black bead-like eyes.</p>
			<p>“Oh come, come, come!” said little Millefleurs, remonstrating yet coaxing, patting him lightly on the arm, “one sees it must have been one of the daughters. It will do no harm to tell me. Am I such an ignorant? These things are happening every day. Is it this one here?⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What are you thinking of?” cried John, angrily. “Lady Edith was only a child.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! then it was the other one,” Millefleurs said, seriously; “that suits me better. It would have been a trifle ridiculous⁠—Beaufort might keep in the background if there is any reason for it: but we must really think of the Duke. He will be in a state of mind, don’t you know, and so will my mother. They will think I have bolted again.”</p>
			<p>“And when is it,” said John satirically, for he was sick at heart and irritable in the discovery which he had made, “that Beaufort’s mission is to be accomplished, and the Duke to fulfil his hopes?”</p>
			<p>Millefleurs laughed a soft rich laugh, not loud. “My dear fellow,” he said, “that is when I marry, don’t you know. That is my occupation now in the world. When I have a wife, the other will be off duty. I am much interested in my occupation at present. It brings so many specimens of humanity under one’s eyes. So different⁠—for women are just as different as men, though you don’t think so perhaps. It might make a man vain,” he said, turning out his pink-tinged palm, “to see how many fair creatures will take notice of him; but then one remembers that it was not always so, and that takes one down again. In California I was liked, I am proud to say, but not admired. It was, perhaps, more amusing. But I must not be ungrateful: for life everywhere is very entertaining. And here are fresh fields and pastures new,” said the little man. “When you have a pursuit, every new place is doubly interesting. It does not matter whether you are hunting or botanising or⁠—, a pursuit gives interest to all things. Now is the time for the country and rural character. I sometimes think it is that which will suit me best.”</p>
			<p>“Then I suppose you are on a tour of inspection, and one of our country young ladies may have the honour of pleasing you,” said John, somewhat fiercely. His companion, looking up in his face with deprecating looks, patted his arm as a kind of protest.</p>
			<p>“Don’t be brutal, Erskine,” he said with his little lisp; “such things are never said.” John would have liked to take him in his teeth and shake him as a dog does, so angry was he, and furious. But little Millefleurs meant no harm. He drew his old schoolfellow along with him, as long as John’s civility held out. Then, to see him strolling along with his little hat pushed on the top of his little round head, and all the curves of his person repeating the lines of that circle! John stopped to look after him with a laugh which he could scarcely restrain so long as Millefleurs was within hearing. It was an angry laugh, though there was nothing in the young man to give occasion for it. There was nothing really in him that was contemptible, for to be plump is not an offence by any code. But John watched him with the fiercest derision going along the country road with his cane held in two fingers, his hat curling in the brim, his locks curling the other way. And this was the man whom even Lady Lindores⁠—even she, a woman so superior to worldly motives⁠—condescended to scheme about. And Edith? was it possible that she, too⁠—even she? Everything seemed to have turned to bitterness in John’s soul. Tinto before him in the distance, with its flaunting flag, gave emphasis to the discovery he had made. For mere money, nothing else, one had been sacrificed. The other, was she to be sacrificed, too? Was there nothing but wealth to be thought of all the world over, even by the best people, by women with every tender grace and gift? When he thought of the part in the drama allotted to himself⁠—to entertain Beaufort, who was the keeper of Millefleurs, in order that Millefleurs might be at liberty to follow his present pursuit, John burst into a laugh not much more melodious than that of Torrance. Beaufort and he could condole with each other. They could communicate, each to each, their several disappointments. But to bring to the neighbourhood this man whom Carry dared not see, whom with such tragic misery in her face she had implored John to keep at a distance⁠—and that it should be her parents who were bringing him in cold blood in order to advance their schemes for her sister⁠—was it possible that anything so base or cruel could be?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
