<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXIV</h2>
			<p>“The thing is, that he must be brought to the point. I said so in town. He dangled after her all the season, and he’s dangled after her down here. The little beggar knows better than that. He knows that sharp people would never stand it. He is trusting to your country simplicity. When a man does not come to the point of his own accord, he must be led to it⁠—or driven to it, for that matter,” said Rintoul. He was out of humour, poor fellow. He had gone astray in his own person. His disapproval of his mother and of everybody belonging to him was nothing in comparison with his disapproval of himself. This put him out in every way: instead of making him tolerant of the others who were no worse than himself, it made him rampant in his wisdom. If it was so that he could not persuade or force himself into the right way, then was it more and more necessary to persuade or force other people. He took a high tone with Lady Lindores, all the more because he had discovered with astonishment, and a comical sort of indignation, that his mother had come over to his way of thinking. He could not believe it to be possible at first, and afterwards this inconsistent young man had felt disgusted with the new accomplice whom he had in his heart believed incapable of any such conversion. But such being the case, there was no need to <i>ménager</i> her susceptibilities. “Or driven to it,” he repeated with emphasis. “I shall not stand by, I promise you, and see my sister <i>planté là</i>⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You have used these words before, Rintoul. They disgust me, and they offend me,” said his mother. “I will not be a party to anything of the kind. Those who do such things dishonour the girl⁠—oh, far more than anything else can do. She does not care at all for him. Most likely she would refuse him summarily.”</p>
			<p>“And you would let her⁠—refuse a dukedom?” cried Rintoul.</p>
			<p>“Refuse a⁠—man whom she does not care for. What could I do? I should even like now, after all that has happened, that it should come to something; but if she found that she could not marry him, how could I interfere?”</p>
			<p>“Jove! but I should interfere,” cried Rintoul, pacing up and down the room. “How could you help interfering? Would you suffer me to throw away all my prospects?” Here he paused, with a curious, half-threatening, half-deprecating look. Perhaps his mother would be one who would suffer him to sacrifice his prospects. Perhaps she would sympathise with him even in that wrong-doing. She was capable of it. He looked at her with mingled disdain and admiration. She was a woman who was capable of applauding him for throwing himself away. What folly! and yet perhaps it was good to have a mother like that. But not for Edith, whose case was of an altogether different complexion from his own. He made a pause, and then he added in a slightly louder tone, being excited: “But he must not be allowed to dangle on for ever. When a fellow follows a girl into the country he must mean something. You may take my word for that.”</p>
			<p>At this moment the handle of the door gave a slight clink; a soft step was audible. “Pardon me for disturbing you, dearest lady,” said the mellifluous voice of Millefleurs. The little Marquis had a foot which made no sound on the carpet. He was daintily attired, and all his movements were noiseless. He came upon the sestartled conspirators like a ghost. “Send me away if I am <i>de trop</i>,” he said, clasping his plump hands. “It is my hour of audience, but Rintoul has the first claim.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t want any audience,” said Rintoul. He had exchanged an anxious glance with his mother, and both had reddened in spite of themselves. Not to betray that you have been discussing some one who appears, while the words of criticism are still on your lips, is difficult at all times; and Rintoul, feeling confused and guilty, was anxious to give the interrupted conversation an air of insignificance. “My mother and I have no secrets. She is not so easy as the mothers in society,” he said, with a laugh.</p>
			<p>“No!” said Millefleurs, folding his hands with an air of devotion. “I would not discuss the <i>chronique scandaleuse</i>, if that is what you mean, in Lady Lindores’s hearing. The air is pure here; it is like living out of doors. There is no <i>dessous des cartes</i>⁠—no behind the scenes.”</p>
			<p>“What does the little beggar mean?” Rintoul said to himself, feeling red and uncomfortable. Lady Lindores took up her work, which was her flag of distress. She felt herself humiliated beyond description. To think that she should be afraid of any one overhearing what she said or what her son had said to her! She felt her cheeks burn and tingle; her needle trembled in her fingers; and then there ensued a most uncomfortable pause. Had he heard what they were saying? Rintoul did not go away, which would have been the best policy, but stood about, taking up books and throwing them down again, and wearing, which was the last thing he wished to do, the air of a man disturbed in an important consultation. As a matter of fact, his mind was occupied with two troublesome questions: the first, whether Millefleurs had overheard anything; the second, how he could himself get away. Millefleurs very soon perceived and shared in this embarrassment. The phrase which had been uttered as he opened the door had reached his ear without affecting his mind for the first moment. Perhaps if he had not perceived the embarrassment of the speaker he would not have given any weight to the words⁠—“When a fellow follows⁠—” Funny alliteration! he said to himself. And then he saw that the mother and son were greatly disturbed by his entrance. He was as much occupied by wondering what they could mean, as they were by wondering if he had heard. But he was the first to cut the difficulty. He said, “Pardon me, dear lady, I have forgotten something. I’ll come back directly if you’ll let me”⁠—and went out. Certainly there had been some discussion going on between mother and son. Perhaps Rintoul had got into debt, perhaps into love; both were things which occurred daily, and it was always best when such a subject had been started between parent and child that they should have it out. So he withdrew, but with that phrase still buzzing in his ears, “When a fellow follows⁠—” It was a comical combination of words; he could not get rid of it, and presently it began to disturb his mind. Instead of going to the library or any of the other rooms in the house, he went outside with the sensation of having something to reflect upon, though he could not be sure what it was. By-and-by the entire sentence came to his recollection. “When a fellow follows a girl into the country⁠—but then, who is it that has followed the girl into the country?⁠—Rintoul?⁠—” This cost him about five minutes’ thought. Then little Millefleurs stopped short in the midst of the path, and clasped his hands against his plump bosom, and turned up his eyes to heaven. “Why! it is I!⁠—” he said to himself, being more grammatical than most men in a state of agitation. He stood for a whole minute in this attitude, among the big blue-green araucarias which stood around. What a subject for a painter if there had been one at hand! It was honour confronting fate. He had not intended anything so serious. He liked, he would have said loved, the ladies of the house. He would not have hesitated anywhere to give full utterance to this sentiment: and to please his father, and to amuse himself, he was consciously on the search for some one who might be suitable for the vacant post of Marchioness of Millefleurs. And he had thought of Edith in that capacity⁠—certainly he had thought of her. So had he thought of various other young ladies in society, turning over their various claims. But it had not occurred to him to come to any sudden decision, or to think that necessary. As he stood there, however, with his eyes upraised, invoking aid from that paternal Providence which watches over marquises, a flood of light spread over the subject and all its accessories. Though he had not thought of them, he knew the prejudices of society; and all that Rintoul had said about leaving a girl <i>planté là</i> was familiar to him. “When a fellow follows” (absurd alliteration! said Millefleurs, with his lisp, to himself) “a girl into the country, he muth mean thomething⁠—” and once more he clasped his hands and pressed them to his breast. His eyes, raised to heaven, took a languishing look; a smile of consciousness played about his mouth; but this was only for a moment, and was replaced at once by a look of firm resolution. No maiden owed her scath to Millefleurs: though he was so plump, he was the soul of honour. Not for a moment could he permit it to be supposed that he was trifling with Edith Lindores, amusing himself⁠—any of those pretty phrases in use in society. He thought with horror of the possibility of having compromised her, even though, so far as he was himself concerned, the idea was not disagreeable. In five minutes⁠—for he had a quick little brain and the finest faculty of observation, a quality cultivated in his race by several centuries of social eminence⁠—Millefleurs had mastered the situation. All the instructions that Rintoul had so zealously endeavoured to convey to his mother’s mind became apparent to Millefleurs in the twinkling of an eye. It would be said that he had left her <i>planté là</i>; he allowed himself no illusion on the subject. So it might be said⁠—but so it never must be said of Edith Lindores. He was perfectly chivalrous in his instant decision. He was not to say in love⁠—though did Providence bestow any one of five or six young ladies, among whom Edith stood high, upon him, Millefleurs felt positively convinced that he would be the happiest man in the world. And he was not sure that he might not be running the risk of a refusal, a thing which is very appalling to a young man’s imagination. But notwithstanding this danger, Millefleurs, without hesitation, braced himself up to do his duty. He buttoned his coat, took off his hat and put it on again, and then pulling himself together, went off without a moment’s hesitation in search of Lord Lindores.</p>
			<p>An hour later the Earl entered his lady’s chamber with a countenance in which gratification, and proud content in an achieved success, were only kept in check by the other kind of pride which would not permit it to be perceived that this success was anything out of the ordinary. He told her his news in a few brief words, which Lady Lindores received with so much agitation, turning from red to white, and with such an appearance of vexation and pain, that the Earl put on his sternest aspect. “What is the meaning of all this flurry and disturbance?” he said. “I hope we are not going to have it all over again, as we had before Carry’s wedding.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t speak of poor Carry’s wedding in comparison with this. This, God grant it, if it comes to pass, will be no degradation⁠—no misery⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Not much degradation, certainly⁠—only somewhere about the best position in England,” with angry scorn Lord Lindores said.</p>
			<p>But the lines were not smoothed away from his wife’s forehead, nor did the flush of shame and pain leave her face. She looked at him for a moment, to see whether she should tell him. But why poison his pleasure? “It is not his fault,” she said to herself; and all that she gave utterance to was an anxious exclamation: “Provided that Edith sees as we do!”</p>
			<p>“She must see as we do,” Lord Lindores said.</p>
			<p>But when Rintoul came in, his mother went to him and seized his arm with both her hands. “He heard what you said!” she cried, with anguish in her voice. “Now I shall never be able to hold up my head in his presence⁠—he heard what you said!”</p>
			<p>Rintoul too, notwithstanding his more enlightened views, was somewhat red. Though it was in accordance with his principles, yet the fact of having helped to force, in any way, a proposal for his sister, caused him an unpleasant sensation. He tried to carry it off with a laugh. “Anyhow, since it <i>has</i> brought him to the point,” he said.</p>
			<p>This was the day on which Millefleurs was to be taken to Tinto to see the house and all its curiosities and wealth. In view of this he had begged that nothing might be said to Edith, with a chivalrous desire to save her pain should her answer be unfavourable. But how could Lady Lindores keep such a secret from her daughter? While she was still full of the excitement, the painful triumph, the terror and shame with which she had received the news, Edith came in to the morning room, which to-day had been the scene of so many important discussions. They had been perhaps half an hour together, going gaily on with the flood of light-hearted conversation about anything and nothing which is natural between a girl and her mother, when she suddenly caught a glimpse in a mirror of Lady Lindores’s troubled face. The girl rushed to her instantly, took this disturbed countenance between her hands, and turned it with gentle force towards her. Her own face grew grave at once. “Something is the matter,” she said; “something has happened. Oh, mother, darling, what is it? Something about Carry?”</p>
			<p>“No, no; nothing, nothing! Certainly nothing that is unhappy⁠—⁠Don’t question me now, Edith. Afterwards, you shall know it all.”</p>
			<p>“Let me know it now,” the girl said; and she insisted with that filial tyranny against which mothers are helpless. At last Lady Lindores, being pressed into a corner, murmured something about Lord Millefleurs. “If he speaks to you to-night, oh, my darling⁠—if he asks you⁠—do not be hasty; say nothing, say nothing, without thought.”</p>
			<p>“Speaks to me⁠—asks me!”⁠—Edith stood wonder-stricken, her eyes wide open, her lips apart. “What should he ask me?” She grew a little pale in spite of herself.</p>
			<p>“My dearest! what should he ask you? What is it that a young man asks⁠—in such circumstances? He will ask you⁠—perhaps⁠—to marry him.”</p>
			<p>Edith gave a kind of shriek⁠—and then burst into a peal of agitated laughter. “Mother, dear, what a fright you have given me! I thought⁠—I didn’t know what to think. Poor little man! Don’t let him do it⁠—don’t let him do it, mamma! It would make us both ridiculous, and if it made him at all⁠—unhappy; but that is nonsense⁠—you are only making fun of me,” said the girl, kissing her, with a hurried eagerness as if to silence her. Lady Lindores drew herself away from her daughter’s embrace.</p>
			<p>“Edith, it is you who are making yourself ridiculous⁠—consider how he has sought you all this time⁠—and he came after you to the country. I have felt what⁠—was coming all along. My dearest, did not you suspect it too?”</p>
			<p>Edith stood within her mother’s arm, but she was angry and held herself apart, not leaning upon the bosom where she had rested so often. “<i>I</i> suspect it! how could I suspect it?” she cried. It went to Lady Lindores’s heart to feel her child straighten herself up, and keep apart from her and all her caresses.</p>
			<p>“Edith, for God’s sake, do not set yourself against it! Think, only think⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What has God got to do with it, mother?” the young creature cried sternly. “I will set myself against it⁠—nay, more than that, I am not like Carry; nothing in the world will make me do it⁠—not any reason, not any argument.” She was still encircled by her mother’s arm, but she stood straight, upright, erect as a willow-wand, unyielding, drawing her garments, as it were, about her, insensible to the quivering lines of her mother’s upturned face, and the softer strain of her embrace. No, not indifferent⁠—but resisting⁠—shutting her eyes to them, holding herself apart.</p>
			<p>“For heaven’s sake, Edith! Oh, my darling, think how different this is from the other! Your father has set his heart on it, and I wish it too. And Millefleurs is⁠—⁠Millefleurs will be⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is this how you persuaded Carry?” cried Edith, with sad indignation; “but mother, mother, listen! not me. It is better that never another word should be said between us on this subject, for I will never do it, whatever may be said. If my father chooses to speak to me, I will give him my answer. Let us say no more⁠—not another word;” and with this the girl unbent and threw herself upon her mother, and stopped her mouth with kisses, indignant, impassioned⁠—her cheeks hot and flushed, her eyes full of angry tears.</p>
			<p>It may be thought that the drive to Tinto of this strange party, all palpitating with the secret which each thought unknown to the other, was a curious episode enough. Millefleurs, satisfied with himself, and feeling the importance of his position with so much to bestow, found, he thought, a sympathetic response in the look of Lady Lindores, to whom, no doubt, as was quite right, her husband had disclosed the great news; but he thought that Edith was entirely ignorant of it. And Edith and her mother had their secret on their side, the possession of which was more momentous still. But they all talked and smiled with the little pleasantries and criticisms that are inevitable in the conversation of persons of the highest and most cultivated classes, and did not betray what was in their hearts.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
