<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
			<p>The present writer has already confessed to a certain disinclination to venture upon any exposition of the manners and customs of the great; and should an attempt be made to thread the mazes of the season, and to represent in sober black and white the brilliant assemblies, the crowded receptions, the drawing-rooms and ballrooms and banqueting-rooms, all full of that sheen of satin and shimmer of pearls which only the most delicate manipulation, the lightest exquisite touch, can secure? Could the writer’s pen be dipped in tints as ethereal as those which fill the brush (if that is not too crude a word) of the accomplished President, then perhaps the task might be attempted; but common ink is not equal to it. Though Lady Lindores was negligent of her duties, and did not give herself up as she ought to have done to the task of getting invitations and doing her daughter justice, yet her shortcomings were made up by the superior energy and knowledge of her husband and son. And as a matter of fact, they went everywhere, and saw a great deal of society. So far were they from being under the standard at that Chiswick fête, as Rintoul nervously anticipated, that the graceful mother and pretty daughter were noticed by eyes whose notice is the highest distinction, and inquired into with that delightful royal curiosity which is so complimentary to mankind, and which must be one of the things which make the painful trade of sovereignty tolerable. Both the ladies, indeed, had so much <i xml:lang="fr">succès</i>, that the anxious young Guardsman, who stalked about after them, too much disturbed to get any satisfaction in his own person, and watching their demeanour as with a hundred eyes, gradually allowed the puckers in his forehead to relax, and went off guard with a sigh of relief. Rintoul was more than relieved⁠—he was delighted with the impression produced by Edith’s fresh beauty. “Oh, come! she’s a pretty little thing, if you please; but not all that,” he said, confused by the excess of approbation accorded to her by some complimentary friend. There was one drawback, however, to this satisfaction, and that was, that neither did Edith “mind a bit” who was introduced to her, who danced with her, or took her down to dinner⁠—whether a magnificent young peer or a penniless younger son; nor, still more culpable, did her mother pay the attention she ought to this, or take care as she ought that her daughter’s smiles were not thrown away. She was known once, indeed, to have⁠—inconceivable folly!⁠—actually gone the length of introducing to Edith, in a ballroom bristling with eligible partners, a brilliant young artist, a “painter-fellow,” the very last person who ought to have been put in the girl’s way. “If a girl goes wrong of herself, and is an idiot, why, you say, it’s because she knows no better,” Rintoul said; “but when it’s her mother!” The young painter danced very well, and was bright and interesting beyond, it is to be supposed, the general level; and he hung about the ladies the whole evening, never long away from one or the other. Rintoul felt that if it happened only one other evening, all the world would say that there was something going on, and possibly some society paper would inform its anxious readers that “a marriage is arranged.” On the other hand, that evening was marked with a white stone on which the young Marquis of Millefleurs, son of the Duke of Lavender, made himself conspicuous as one of Edith’s admirers, pursuing her wherever she went, till the foolish girl was disposed to be angry; though Lady Lindores this time had the sense to excuse him as being so young, and to add that he seemed “a nice sort of boy,”⁠—not a way, certainly, to recommend so desirable an adorer to a fanciful girl, but still perhaps, in the circumstances, as much as could be expected. Lady Lindores received with great composure a few days after, an announcement from her husband that he had asked the youth to dinner. She repeated her praise with a perfectly calm countenance⁠—</p>
			<p>“I shall be glad to see him, Robert. I thought him a mere boy, very young, but frank and pleasant as a boy should be.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you call a boy. I believe he is four-and-twenty,” said Lord Lindores, with some indignation; and then he added in a subdued tone, as knowing that he had something less easy to suggest, “I have asked someone else whom you will probably not look on in the same light. I should much rather have left him out, but there was no getting Millefleurs without him. He has been travelling with him as a sort of tutor-companion, I suppose.” Here he seemed to pause to get up his courage, which was so remarkable that his wife’s suspicions were instantly aroused. She turned towards him with a look of roused attention.</p>
			<p>“I don’t hesitate to say that I am sorry to bring him again in contact with the family. Of course the whole affair was folly from beginning to end. But the young fellow himself behaved well enough. There is nothing against him personally, and I am rather willing to let him see that it has entirely passed from our minds.”</p>
			<p>“Of whom are you speaking?” cried Lady Lindores.</p>
			<p>The Earl actually hesitated, stammered, almost blushed, so far as a man of fifty is capable of blushing. “You remember young Beaufort, whom we saw so much of in⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Beaufort!” cried Lady Lindores⁠—“<em>Edward!</em>” her voice rose into a sort of shriek.</p>
			<p>“He certainly was never Edward to me. I thought it best, when Millefleurs presented him to me, to receive him at once as an old acquaintance. And I hope you will do so also, without any fuss. It is very important that it should be made quite clear we have no fear of him, or feeling in the matter.”</p>
			<p>“Edward!” Lady Lindores said again. “How can I receive him as if I had no feeling in the matter? He has called me mother. I have kissed him as Carry’s future husband. Good heavens! and Carry poor Carry!”</p>
			<p>“I did not know you had been such a fool,” he cried, reddening; then after a pause, “I see no reason why Carry should be called poor. Her position at home is in some points better than our own. And it is not necessary to tell Carry of everyone who enters this house, which is so much out of her way.”</p>
			<p>“My poor child, my poor child!” the mother said, wringing her hands. “She divined this. She had a fear of something. She thought John Erskine might invite him. Oh, you need not suppose this was ever a subject of conversation between us!⁠—but it seems that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Torrance suspected John Erskine himself to be the man. Edith surprised them in the midst of a painful scene on this subject, and then Carry told me of her terror lest John should invite⁠—she did not say whom. It was not necessary between us to name any names.”</p>
			<p>“What did Torrance know about ‘the man’? as you say; what had he to do with it? You women are past bearing. This was some of your confidences, I suppose.”</p>
			<p>“It was Carry’s own communication to the man who is her husband. She thought it her duty, poor, poor child!⁠—and now, is it I that am to be made the instrument of further torture?” Lady Lindores cried.</p>
			<p>“The instrument of⁠—fiddlesticks! This is really not a subject for heroics,” said her husband, fretfully. “I ask you to receive as an acquaintance merely⁠—no intimacy required of you⁠—a man against whom I know nothing. These absurd passages you refer to, <em>I</em> had no knowledge of. It was idiotic; but fortunately it is all over, and no harm done. For Carry’s sake even, that nobody may be able to say that there was any embarrassment on her account, it seems to me your duty to receive him⁠—especially as his coming involves Millefleurs.”</p>
			<p>“What do I care for that boy? What do you want with that boy?” Lady Lindores cried. She did not show her usual desire to please and soothe him, but spoke sharply, with an impatience which she could not control.</p>
			<p>“Whatever my reason may be, I hope I have a right to invite Millefleurs if I please,” said the Earl, with a cloudy smile, “and his companion with him, whoever he may be.”</p>
			<p>Lady Lindores made no reply, nor was there anything further said between them on the subject. The intimation, however, almost overwhelmed the woman, who in these last years had learned to contemplate her husband in so different a light. Enough has been said about the tragical unworthiness which tears asunder those who are most closely bound together, and kills love, as people say, by killing respect. To kill love is terrible, but yet it is an emancipation in its way; and no man or woman can suffer for the unworthiness of one whom he or she has ceased to love, with anything approaching the pain which we feel when those who never can cease to be dear to us fall into evil. And love is so fatally robust, and can bear so many attacks! Lady Lindores, who divined her husband’s motives, and the unscrupulous adherence to them through thick and thin which would recoil from nothing, suffered from that and every other discovery that he was not what she had thought him, with bitter pangs, from which she would have been free had he ceased to be the first object of her affections. But that he could never cease to be; and his faults tore her as with red-hot pincers. She could not bear to think of it, and yet was obliged to think of it, unable to forget it. That he should not shrink from the embarrassment and pain of renewing an acquaintance so broken up, when it happened to appear to him useful for his own ends, was more to her than even the pain she would feel in herself receiving the man who might have been Carry’s husband⁠—whom Carry had, as people say, jilted in order to marry a richer rival. How could she look him in the face, knowing this? How could she talk to him without allusion to the past? But even bad as this was, it was more heartrending still to think why it was that he was invited. She had to explain it to Edith too, who was thunderstruck. “Edward! you don’t mean <em>Edward</em>, mamma?” “Yes, my darling, I mean Edward, no one else. He must not be Edward now, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaufort, to you and me. Your father was obliged to ask him, for he was with Lord Millefleurs.” “But what does he want with Lord Millefleurs? I would rather have had nobody in the house till we go home than ask Edward. And what, oh what will you say to Carry, mamma?” “We must say nothing,” the mother cried, with a quivering lip. “It must not be breathed to her. Thank heaven, we have no old servants! At all costs Carry must not know.” “I thought you said, mamma, that there never was such a thing as a secret⁠—that everything was known?” “And so I did,” cried Lady Lindores, distracted. “Why do you remind me of what I have said? It is not as if I could help it. We must stand firm, and get through it as well as we can, and think as little as we can of what may follow. There is no other way.” This was how Lady Lindores bore the brunt of her child’s inquiries. As for Lord Rintoul, he declared that he understood his father perfectly. “If Beaufort were left out, he’d fill Millefleurs’s mind with all sorts of prejudices. I’d rather not meet the fellow myself; but as it can’t be helped, it must be done, I suppose,” he said. “He will never say anything, that is certain. And what can that boy’s opinion be to us?” said Lady Lindores. Her son stared at her for a moment open-eyed. “Mamma, you are the most wonderful woman I ever knew,” he said. “If you don’t mean it, it’s awfully clever; and if you do mean it, you are such an innocent as never was seen. Why, don’t you know that everybody is after Millefleurs? He is the great match of the season. I wish I thought Edith had a chance.” Lady Lindores covered her face with her hands, hating the very light. Her boy, too! They pursued their ignoble way side by side with her, scarcely believing that it was possible she did not see and share their meaning, and in her heart approve of all their efforts.</p>
			<p>“What is wrong now?” said Rintoul. “I declare I never know what to say. Sometimes you take things quite easily. Sometimes you will flare up at nothing at all.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think it is nothing at all that your sister and I should be brought into what you yourselves call a husband-hunt?” cried Lady Lindores. “Have you not told me of a dozen women who are trying to catch this man and that? Don’t you think it is ignominious to expose us to the same reproach? Perhaps they are just as innocent of it as I.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, trust them for that,” said Rintoul, with a laugh. “Of course it is said of everybody. It will be said of you just the same; we can’t help that. But surely you can see yourself⁠—even <em>you</em> can see⁠—that when a fellow like Millefleurs actually puts himself out of the way to come after a girl like Edith⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Robin!” cried his mother (a little <i xml:lang="fr">accès</i> of passion seized her). “Do you think Edith⁠—Edith, your sister⁠—is not worth a hundred boys like this Millefleurs? What do you mean by coming out of his way? Is it the fashion now that girls like Edith should put themselves at the disposal of a little jackanapes⁠—a bit of a boy⁠—a⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Don’t lose your temper, mamma,” said the young man, with a laugh. “But now you’ve had it out,” said this wise son, “only just be reasonable, and think a moment. Millefleurs is a great catch. There’s not such a big fish to be landed anywhere; and Edith is no better than a hundred others. Do hear a fellow out. She’s very pretty and nice, and all that; but there’s heaps of pretty, nice girls⁠—and the prettier they are, and the nicer they are, the less they have a penny to bless themselves with,” he added, in a regretful parenthesis. “There’s a hundred of them, and there’s only one of him. Of course he knows that well enough. Of course he knows it’s a great thing when he lets a girl see that he admires her; and if her people are such fools as to let him slip through their fingers for want of a little trouble⁠—why, then, they deserve to lose their chance⁠—and that’s all I can say,” Rintoul said.</p>
			<p>Once more Lady Lindores was silenced. What was the use of saying anything? Indignation was out of place, or anything that she could say of love profaned and marriage desecrated. To speak of the only foundation of a true union to this world-instructed boy⁠—what would be the use of it? She swallowed down as best she could the bitterness, the pain, the disappointment and contempt, which it is anguish to feel in such a case. After a while she said with a smile, commanding herself, “And you, Robin, who are so clever as to know all this, are you too a catch, my poor boy? are you pursued by mothers, and competed for by girls?⁠—not, of course, to the same extent as Lord Millefleurs⁠—I recognise the difference; but something, I suppose, in the same way?”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Rintoul, caressing his moustache, “not to the same extent, as you say, and not in the same way perhaps. I’m nobody, of course, when Millefleurs is there; but still, you know, when there’s no Millefleurs on the horizon⁠—why, one has one’s value, mother. It’s an old title, for one thing, and Scotch estates, which people think better than they are, perhaps. They don’t throw heiresses at my head; but still, you know, in a general way⁠—”</p>
			<p>As he sat stroking that moustache which was not very mature yet, but rather young and scanty for its age, with a little smile of subdued vanity about his mouth, and a careless air of making light of his advantages, what woman could have helped laughing? But when a mother laughs at her boy, the ridicule hurts more than it amuses her. “I see,” she said. “Then don’t you think, Robin, you who are so clear-sighted, that this young man will see through our attentions, if we pay him attention, and laugh at our efforts to⁠—catch him (that’s the word, is it?), as much as you do yourself?”</p>
			<p>“All right,” said Rintoul; “so he will, of course; but what does that matter when a fellow takes a fancy into his head? Of course he knows you will want to catch him if you can⁠—that stands to reason⁠—everybody wants to catch him; but if he likes Edith, he will never mind that⁠—if he likes Edith⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Robin, hold your tongue,” cried his mother, almost violently. She felt that she could have boxed his ears in the heat of her displeasure. “I will not hear your sister’s name bandied about so. You disgust me⁠—you horrify me⁠—you make me ill to hear you! <em>My</em> son! and you venture to speak of your sister so!”</p>
			<p>Rintoul, arrested in his speech, stared for a moment open-mouthed; and then he shook his head with a look of impatient toleration, and uttered a weary sigh. “If you will not hear reason, of course it’s in vain my arguing with you,” he said.</p>
			<p>These several encounters, and the heavy thought of what might be to come soon, took away all the gloss of pleasure that had been upon Lady Lindores’s first entrance into society. She thought, indeed, there had never been any pleasure at all in it; but this was an unintentional self-deception. She thought that Carry’s pale image had come between her and every lighter emotion. She did not herself know how natural she was⁠—her mood changing, her heart rising in spite of herself, a bright day, a pleasant company, the consciousness of being approved, and even admired, giving her some moments of gratification in spite of all; but after these discussions, she was so twisted and turned the wrong way, so irritated and disenchanted by her husband and son, that she felt herself sick and disgusted with London and all the world. If she could but get home! but yet at home there was poor Carry, who would ask after everything, and from whom it would be so difficult to conceal the reappearance of her old lover: if she had but wings like a dove!⁠—but oh, whither to go to be at rest! One must be alone, and free of all loves and relationships, to hope for that anywhere by flight. And what was before her was appalling to her: to meet the man whom she had thought of as her son, to keep a calm countenance, and talk to him as if no different kind of intercourse had ever been between them⁠—to avoid all confidence, all <i xml:lang="fr">épanchements</i>, and to keep him at the safe distance of acquaintanceship: how was she to do it? She said to herself that she did not know how to look him in the face, he who had been so deeply wronged. And then she began to hope that he, full of delicacy and fine feeling as he used to be, would see how impossible it was that they should meet, and would refuse to come. This hope kept her up till the last moment. When the evening came, it was with a quivering emotion which she could scarcely restrain, that she waited to receive her guests, hoping more strenuously every moment, and trying to persuade herself, that Beaufort would not come. He had accepted the invitation; but what was that? He would accept, no doubt, in order to show them that he had got over it⁠—that he bore no malice⁠—and then he would send his excuses. Her eyes were feverish with eagerness and suspense when the door opened. She could not hear the names announced for the beating of her heart in her ears; but it was only when she saw against the light the shadow of a figure not to be forgotten, and heard the doors open and shut, that she realised the fact that he had really presented himself. Then it seemed to Lady Lindores that all her pulses stood still, and that an appalling stillness instead of their loud flutter of beating was in her ears and in the world. He had really come! She became conscious of her husband’s voice speaking to her, and the sound of his name, and the touch of his hand, and then she regained her composure desperately, by such an effort as it seemed to her she had never made before. For to faint, or to call attention to herself in any way, was what must not be done. And by-and-by the moment was over, and the party were all seated at table, eating and drinking, and talking commonplaces. When Lady Lindores looked round the table and saw Beaufort’s face among the other faces, she seemed to herself to be in a dream. The only other face of which she was conscious was that of Edith, perfectly colourless, and full of inquiry and emotion; and at the other end of the table her husband, throwing a threatening, terrified look across the flowers and the lights, and all the prettinesses of the table. These three she seemed to see, and no more.</p>
			<p>But Lord Millefleurs by her side was full of pleasant chatter and cheerful boyish confidence, and demanded her attention. He was aware how important he was; and it never occurred to him that Beaufort, who was an excellent fellow, but nobody in particular, could distract the attention of those who surrounded him from himself. Millefleurs sat between Lady Lindores and Edith. It was a position that was his due.</p>
			<p>“I am so sorry you are not well,” he said. “The fact is, it is London, Lady Lindores. I know your complaint, for it is mine too. Was there ever anything so irrational as to carry on this treadmill as we all do⁠—you out of a wholesome country life, no doubt, and I out of a wandering existence, always in the open air, always in motion? What do we do it for? Lady Edith, tell me, what do we do it for?⁠—I am asking everybody. Half of it would be very well, you know, but the whole of it is purgatory. I am sure that is your opinion. Is it merely fashion, or is it something in our nature which requires extravagance in all we do⁠—”</p>
			<p>“There is not much extravagance in what we do habitually,” said Lady Lindores, “which perhaps makes this outbreak of activity less alarming to us. It is a change; and as for Edith, this is virtually her first season⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I thought it was your first season,” cried the little Marquis. “I knew it must be so.” This he said with decision, as if in triumph over some adversary. “There is a look which one is never deceived in. I have seen all my sisters come out, so I am quite an authority. They get to look at things quite in another way; they get so knowing, as bad⁠—as I am myself,” the youth added in perfect good faith, with a serious look upon his infantile countenance, and a lisping utterance which gave point to the speech. Lord Millefleurs, though he did not need to study appearances, was yet aware of the piquancy of the contrast between his round childlike countenance and the experience of his talk.</p>
			<p>“I should not have thought you were so bad,” said Edith, beguiled into smiling. “I think you look as if you were in your first season too⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, bad⁠—Bohemian, a waif and a stray,” said Millefleurs; “you cannot think what an abandoned little person I was, till Beaufort took me in hand. You knew Beaufort, abroad somewhere? So he tells me. How lucky for him to be able to renew such an acquaintance! I need not tell you what a fine fellow he is⁠—he has made me quite a reformed character. Do not laugh, Lady Edith; you hurt my feelings. You would not laugh if I were a coal-heaver addressing a meeting and telling how wicked I had been.”</p>
			<p>“And have you really been so wicked? You do not look so,” said Edith, who, amused in spite of herself, began to get used to the grave countenance of Beaufort, seated on the other side of the table. Both the ladies were grateful to Millefleurs, who chattered on, and gave them time to recover themselves.</p>
			<p>“No,” he said, “that is what makes it so funny, they all tell me. I am a wolf in sheep’s clothing; at least I was⁠—I was, until Beaufort took me in hand. At present I am good, as good as gold. I get up early, and go to bed⁠—when I can. I go out to three parties every night, and stand about at everybody’s receptions. I even pay calls in the morning. I shall go to a levee soon⁠—I know I shall,” he said, in an accent of deep conviction. “Can you think of anything more virtuous than that?”</p>
			<p>“And what has your Bohemianism consisted in, Lord Millefleurs?”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens!” said the self-accused, “do you venture to ask me, Lady Edith?⁠—everything that is dreadful. For months I never wrote a letter, for months I never had a penny. It was the best fun in the world. The sting of being poor is when you can’t help it. I believe, for my part, that the most luxurious condition in this world is when you know you can be well off at any moment, and yet are half starving. No, I never was half starving. I worked with these hands;” and he held out a pair of plump, delicate, pink-tinged hands, not without a little vanity. “To feel that it’s quite a chance whether you have ever any dinner again, to be altogether uncertain how you’re to get shelter for the night⁠—and yet to be quite sure that nothing dreadful can happen to you, that at the worst you can always ‘draw a bugle from your side,’ and be surrounded by ‘five-and-thirty belted knights,’⁠—I assure you it is the most delightful excitement in the world.”</p>
			<p>It was impossible to resist this baby-faced and lisping adventurer. The mother and daughter both yielded to his fascinations. The conversation became more and more animated and amusing. At the other end of the table they were not by any means so cheerful; but Lord Lindores beheld with a satisfaction far more solid than any sort of amusement, the result of his experiment. Edith, who had been pale and distraite, doing herself no sort of justice, when they sat down at table, had roused up, and was now bright and responsive, interested in all that was being said to her. And Millefleurs, it was evident, was enjoying himself thoroughly. Two such women giving their full attention to him, listening to all his adventures⁠—which were neither few nor small⁠—was enough to raise him to the height of satisfaction. Lord Lindores talked very rationally and agreeably to the lady next him, but it was with an effort that he caught her not very brilliant remarks, so much interested was he in what was going on at the other end of the room. As for Rintoul, he gave himself up to his dinner. Things were going as well as possible, he thought; and though Millefleurs was a little Bohemian, he was the heir of a Duke, and could do no wrong.</p>
			<p>It was thus that Lady Lindores was beguiled almost to forget the other guest at the table, whose coming had affected her so deeply. Her interest was easily excited, and the little Marquis was delightful. And it was not till she had returned to the comparative quiet of the drawing-room that the recollection of Beaufort came back to her. Much of the danger seemed over. It would be over altogether in another hour, and the tremor in her mind was not so all-pervading as when she first saw his familiar face approaching. But she was not to get over her ordeal so easily. When the gentlemen came upstairs, Beaufort came at once towards her. He stood in front of her for a moment, as if claiming his right to be heard, shutting everybody else out. She felt a sort of fascination in his gaze, and could make no attempt to begin any conversation. Her tremor returned: she looked up wistfully at him without anything to say, clasping and unclasping in unspoken appeal her unsteady hands.</p>
			<p>“It is a long time since we have met,” he said at length.</p>
			<p>“Yes⁠—it is a long time, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaufort.”</p>
			<p>“And many things have happened since that time.”</p>
			<p>She raised her clasped hands a little from her lap in mute entreaty, and made no other reply; but it did not occur to her⁠—what was the case⁠—that he was quite as much excited as she was, and did not notice her agitation, being so fully occupied with his own.</p>
			<p>“I hope⁠—that all of your family are⁠—well: and happy, Lady Lindores.”</p>
			<p>“Very well. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaufort, I know that there is much that must have seemed strange and cruel to you. How can I speak of it now? It is impossible to explain.”</p>
			<p>He paused a little, replying nothing. Then he said suddenly, “If you would let me come and talk to you⁠—talk of everything⁠—I should feel it a great kindness⁠—when I could see you alone.”</p>
			<p>She put out her hands now in sudden alarm and deprecation. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Beaufort, it could do no good, it would be very painful. Do not ask me to do it. For me it would be a terrible ordeal⁠—and no advantage to you.”</p>
			<p>“I think it would be an advantage,” he said gently.</p>
			<p>Again she clasped her hands, imploring forbearance. “I do not wish to try to justify⁠—but after so long a time⁠—is it right, is it kind, do you think, to press me so?”</p>
			<p>“Let me come and talk to you,” he said; “you need not fear my reproaches. May not I know how it was, how it came about? I will not complain. How can I cease to be interested, if that were all? Let me come and talk to you⁠—let me know how it was.”</p>
			<p>Lady Lindores did not know what to answer or how to hide her emotion. She was trying to form an evasive answer with lips that faltered, when suddenly her husband came to her relief.</p>
			<p>“I should not have expected you to have had part in adventures such as I hear Millefleurs relating. Where was he really when you picked him up?” said Lord Lindores.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
