<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-31" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</h2>
			<p>Next day the country-side far and near thought and talked of nothing but the fatal accident at Tinto, which was such a public event as moved everybody. There was no figure in the district more widely known than that of Pat Torrance on his black mare, a powerful horse and powerful man, looking as if they could defy every power of nature; and it thrilled every village far and near, every lone farm-steading and cluster of cottages for miles round, to be told that Black Jess and her master had both been ended by one false step, and that Pat Torrance, strong and rich and potent as he was, had died the death of a dog, unaided, unseen. The news ran from village to village like the fiery cross⁠—everywhere expanding into new details and a deeper and deeper horror of description. First the bare fact, then all these additional circumstances, making it more and more visibly evident to every excited listener, filled the air. Each new passer-by was like a new edition of a newspaper, and had heard something more. How the two bodies had been found, horse and man; how Tinto had been warned over and over again of the danger of the Scaur, and would listen to no advice on the subject, but insisted on leaving it as it was, either for the sake of the view (though it was little he was heeding about views), or for the brag, which was more likely; and how he was got up with much trouble, and carried in dead to his own house, which he had left in all his pride an hour or two before. What ground for reflection upon the vicissitudes of life was here! There was not a group of two or three people anywhere but one at least would shake the head and lift up the voice of wisdom, bidding the others note how in the midst of life we were in death. And when this first horror was exhausted, there ensued the brief summing up of character and life, the rapid history in which our neighbours epitomise us as soon as we are ended. There were no illusions on the subject of wild Pat Torrance; but on the whole he fared well in the hands of the rude country-folk, whose taste was not fine enough to be offended by his roughnesses. In spite of all his vices and extravagances, he had a certain good-fellowship with his inferiors in position, a rough familiarity of address which passed for kindness, and conciliated the common mind. On every side the wild incidents of his youth were recalled, not unkindly. “Eh, poor Tinto, poor fallow! I mind when he was a young lad⁠—” the commentators began on every side. And the women concluded that perhaps if he had gotten a wife more like himself, things might have been different. The rural imagination accepted him as he was, with many a sage reflection, but little censure on the whole⁠—winding up the story of his feats and frolics, his stormy, wild career, with a big rustic sigh for the ploughboy-gentleman, the rude Laird who was so near to them. The tragedy was as complete and typical as the primitive historian could desire. And the man who would take no warning, but kept the dangerous spot unguarded that he might get his death on it, was as broad an example of human rashness and blindness as could have been selected. Wild Pat Torrance, poor fallow! It was just the end which everybody might have expected, it was allowed on all hands.</p>
			<p>But presently there arose a chill whisper, like the first creeping upward of an east wind, bringing greyness and blight over earth and sky. Who can say how this atmospheric influence rises, which one moment is not, and the next has covered the country with an ungenial chill? It was the same with this moral cloud, which came, nobody knew from whence, nor how, rising in a moment. The origin of it could not be brought home to any individual, but there it was. After all, how could it be that Black Jess, used to every step of the way, went over the Scaur? In a moment the tide of popular comment changed, and those who had pointed out the awful justice of fate by which Pat Torrance had been made to bring about his own fate by his obstinacy, began to say that so bold a rider never could have lost his life on so well-known a road⁠—without foul play. Accident! how could it be accident, without some human hand to help? It was not till the second morning that this development of the tragedy came; and it took the whole of that day to establish the connection⁠—which flashed upon the general mind like lightning at last⁠—between John Erskine’s torn sleeve and dishevelled appearance and the fate of Torrance. John Tamson swore with angry oaths afterwards that it was not from him the tale came; but others had seen young Dalrulzian, flushed and muddy, coming from the gate of Tinto on that eventful afternoon; and when the community began to think it over and compare notes, nothing could be more natural than the conclusion to which they came. If the original news had flown over the country like the war-signal of the old clans, this was like the spreading of a sheet of flame⁠—it burst out at point after point after the merest touch of contact. Young Dalrulzian was little known. The country knew no stories of his youth to endear him. He had been brought up far away. He was an Englishman, almost an alien. And Tinto, it was well known, was rough of speech, and “couldna bide” the dainty and delicate. What if they met in the wood; what if there had been a struggle⁠—if the weaker man who had no chance against the stronger had seized Black Jess by the bridle, and driven the high-spirited animal frantic? The groups who had been recalling all the old stories of Tinto, now changed like magic into little committees of accusation, with their heads close together, framing their indictment. The question was given against John Erskine all over the country before the ending of the second day.</p>
			<p>There is no coroner’s inquest in Scotland. When a death is attended by doubtful circumstances, the procedure is slower and more elaborate, and private individuals are reluctant to move in a matter so painful. But yet the atmosphere of suspicion and popular condemnation stole into Dalrulzian as it had crept over the whole country. It conveyed itself to the supposed criminal himself in a subtle sense of something wrong. He had not a notion what it was⁠—neither did he know at first that it was he who was the object disapproved of; but it was impossible not to feel that something was wrong. The aspect of Rolls himself, conjoined with his extraordinary behaviour on the night of Torrance’s death, was remarkable enough to excite alarm. The old servant seemed to have grown ten years older in a single night. His face was furrowed with deep lines, his shoulders bowed, his step tottering. The pathos and earnestness of the looks which he bent upon his young master were indescribable. The air, half critical, half paternal, with which he had been wont to regard him, was gone. He no longer interfered in every arrangement with that sense of superior wisdom which had amused John from the moment of his arrival. All the humour of the situation was over. Intense gravity, almost solemnity, was in the countenance of Rolls; he was constantly on the watch, as if he expected unwelcome visitors. Beaufort, who was not given to mirth, was roused out of his gravity by the melancholy aspect of Methusaleh, as he called him. “One would think your servants expected you to be carried off to prison for high treason,” he said, laughing⁠—for Rolls was not the only one in the house who regarded John with these alarmed and solemn eyes. Bauby, who on ordinary occasions had nothing but a broad smile and look of maternal admiration for her young master, was continually visible, gazing at him from unexpected corners with her apron at her eyes. When he asked her if she wanted anything with him, she would murmur, “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John!” and cry. The other maids supporting her behind, fled from his presence. The gardener regarded him with a sort of stern inquiry when he passed carrying his basket of vegetables to the house. John was disturbed, as a man of sympathetic nature cannot help being disturbed, by this curious atmosphere of discomfort. He could not tell what it was.</p>
			<p>Beaufort was not an inspiriting companion for a man thus perplexed and confounded. To find himself in the district where Carry lived, to be in her neighbourhood, yet separated from her as by walls of iron, impressed his languid mind with a deeper shade of that sentimental consciousness which was habitual to him. Her name had not yet been mentioned between the friends; but Beaufort walked about the country roads in a constant state of expectation, feeling that every carriage he heard approaching might reveal to him the face which he longed yet feared to see. And for the first three or four days this was all the entertainment which John provided for his friend. He was full of embarrassment as to the situation altogether. Lady Lindores and Edith were, he had heard, at Tinto, where he could not disturb them; and he felt no inclination to make his appearance at Lindores in their absence. Torrance’s death and Beaufort’s presence seemed, indeed, to place impossible barriers between him and them. It would have been sufficiently uncomfortable, he had felt, to produce his friend there in the lifetime of Carry’s husband; but to present him now, when so unexpectedly, so tragically, Carry was once more free, became an impossibility. In every way John felt himself paralysed. The air affected him, he could not tell how. He took his companion out walking all over the country, and drove him to long distances in his dogcart, but introduced him to no one, nor ever went to any other house. And nobody called during this curious interval. The two men lived like hermits, and talked of their old comrades and associations, but never of the new. John even answered Beaufort’s question about Tinto, which was one of the first points in the landscape which attracted his curiosity, without telling him of the tragedy which had happened there. “It belongs to the Torrances,” he had said abruptly, and no more. It did not seem possible to tell Beaufort that her husband was dead. Troublesome as his coming was at any time, it seemed almost an immodest intrusion now; and John was disturbed and harassed by it. His mind was sufficiently troubled and uneasy on his own account; and this seemed like an odious repetition, intensification of his own circumstances. Two unfortunate lovers together, with the two ladies of their choice so separated from them, though so near; and now this utterly bewildering and distracting new element brought into the dilemma, throwing a wild and feverish gleam of impious possibility on what had been so impossible before. He could not speak of it: he could not breathe Edith’s name or Carry’s into the too sympathetic, anxious ear of his friend. He held him at arm’s-length, and talked of Dick and Tom and Harry, the comrades of the past, but never of what was so much more deeply interesting and important to both of them now.</p>
			<p>“Look here, Erskine,” said Beaufort; “I thought you were seeing a great deal of⁠—your neighbours: and that Millefleurs would have come to me before now. I shall have to send him word I am here.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure. I had forgotten Millefleurs,” said John. “You forget I only knew of your coming a few hours before you arrived.”</p>
			<p>“But I thought⁠—people in the country see so much of each other generally.”</p>
			<p>“They have been⁠—engaged⁠—with family matters,” said John.</p>
			<p>“Do you mean to say it is all settled?⁠—and that Millefleurs is to marry⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I know nothing about marrying,” cried John, harshly; and then, recollecting himself, he added, in a subdued tone, “There can be nothing of that sort going on at present. It is death, not marriage, that occupies them now.”</p>
			<p>Beaufort opened his languid eyes and looked with curiosity in his friend’s face. “Is it so? Yet Millefleurs stays on. That looks as if very intimate relations had been established, Erskine.”</p>
			<p>“Does it? I don’t know what relations have been established,” John said, with visible impatience. And he got up and went out of the room abruptly, breaking off all further discussion. Beaufort sent a note to his pupil that evening. It was the fourth or fifth day after his arrival. “I made sure I should have seen you, or I would have let you know my whereabouts sooner,” he wrote. He was himself oppressed by the atmosphere round him, without knowing why. He had expected a genial Scotch house, full of company and life, with something of that exaggeration of fancy which had made Dalrulzian so wonderfully disappointing to John himself⁠—a house where, amid the movement of lively society, his own embarrassing position would have been softened, and he might even have met his former love in the crowd without special notice or more pain than was inevitable. But he seemed to have dropped instead into a hermitage, almost into a tomb.</p>
			<p>Millefleurs made his appearance next morning, very grave too, as everybody seemed in this serious country, and with none of his usual chirruping confidence. “I never guessed you were here,” he said; “everything of course, at Lindores, is wrapped in gloom.”</p>
			<p>“There has been a death⁠—” said Beaufort.</p>
			<p>“A death!⁠—yes. Has not Erskine told you? A tragedy: nothing so terrible has happened here for ages. You’ve heard, Erskine,” he said, turning round suddenly upon John, who was in the background, “that there are suspicions of foul play.”</p>
			<p>John came forward into the light; there was embarrassment and annoyance in his face. “I have said nothing to Beaufort about it⁠—he did not know the man⁠—why should I? What did you say there were suspicions of?”</p>
			<p>Millefleurs looked him full in the face, with a curious direct look, and answered, with a certain sternness, oddly inappropriate to his cast of countenance, “Foul play.”</p>
			<p>John was startled. He looked up with a movement of surprise, then returned Millefleurs’s gaze with a mingled expression of astonishment and displeasure. “Foul play!” he said; “impossible!”⁠—then added, “Why do you look at me so?”</p>
			<p>Millefleurs did not make any reply. He turned to Beaufort, who stood by puzzled, looking on. “I ought not to stay,” he said; “but Lord Lindores seems to wish it, and there are some things to be settled; and I am very much interested besides. There is no coroner in Scotland, I hear. How will the investigation be managed?” he said, turning to John again.</p>
			<p>“Lord Millefleurs,” said John, who was not unwilling, in his general sense of antagonism and annoyance, to pick a quarrel, “your look at me requires some explanation. What does it mean?”</p>
			<p>There was a moment’s silence, and they stood opposite to each other, little Millefleurs’s plump person, with all its curves, drawn up into an attitude of dignity, his chubby countenance set, while John looked down upon him with an angry contempt, merging towards ridicule. The group was like that of an indignant master and schoolboy; but it was evident that the schoolboy meant defiance.</p>
			<p>“It means⁠—just such an interpretation as you choose to give it,” said Millefleurs.</p>
			<p>“For heaven’s sake,” said Beaufort, “no more of this! Millefleurs, are you out of your senses? Erskine, you must see this is folly. Don’t make up a quarrel out of nothing.”</p>
			<p>John made a distinct effort to control himself. “To me it appears nothing,” he said; “I cannot even guess at any meaning that may be in it; but Millefleurs means something, Beaufort, as you can very easily see.”</p>
			<p>At this moment Rolls put his head in at the door. “It’s Sir James Montgomery come to see you. I have showed him into the drawing-room, for it’s on business,” the old man said. He was standing behind the door when John came out, and his master could not help remarking that he was trembling in every limb. “The Lord help us a’! you’ll be cautious, sir,” Rolls said.</p>
			<p>John, in his perplexity and gathering wonder, seized him by the arm. “In God’s name, Rolls, what do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Swear none, sir,” said the old servant⁠—“swear none; but oh, be cautious, for the love of God!”</p>
			<p>John Erskine walked into the room in which Sir James awaited him, with a sense of wonder and dismay which almost reached the length of stupefaction. What did they all mean? He had not a clue, not the faintest thread of guidance. Nothing had in his own thoughts connected him even with the tragedy at Tinto. He had been doubly touched and impressed by it in consequence of the fact that he had seen the unfortunate Torrance so short a time before; but that he could, by the wildest imagination, be associated with the circumstances of his death, did not occur to him for a moment. The idea did not penetrate his mind even now, but he felt that there was some shadow which he could not penetrate lying upon him. A blinding veil seemed thrown over his faculties. There was a meaning in it, but what the meaning was he could not tell. He went in to his new visitor with a confusion which he could not shake off, hoping, perhaps, that some sort of enlightenment might be got through him. Sir James was standing against one of the windows, against the light, with his hat in his hands. His whole attitude told of embarrassment and distress. He made no movement as if intending to sit down⁠—did not step forward heartily, as his custom was, to enfold John’s hand in his own with cheerful cordiality, but stood there against the light, smoothing his hat round and round in his hand. It petrified John to see his old friend so. He went up as usual with outstretched hand, but Sir James only touched the tip of his fingers with an embarrassed bow. Instead of his usual genial aspect, he half-averted his face, and kept his eyes on his hat, even when he spoke.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine,” he said, with hesitation, “I came to see you. I mean, I wanted to have some little conversation with you, if you have no objections⁠—about⁠—about this sad affair.”</p>
			<p>“What sad affair?” John was bewildered, but still more angry than bewildered. What was the meaning of it all? Was the entire world in a conspiracy against him?</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said the old general, giving him one look of reproof, “such events are not so common in our quiet country-side that there should be any doubt as to what I mean.”</p>
			<p>“Unless what you mean is to drive me distracted”⁠—cried John. “What is it? First Millefleurs, then you! In heaven’s name, what do you mean? What have I done, that your aspect is changed⁠—that you speak to me like a stranger, like a culprit, like⁠—Speak out, by all means! What is this sad affair? In what way have I wronged any man? Why should my friends turn upon me, and call me Sir, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Erskine? What have I done?”</p>
			<p>“I wish to judge no man,” said Sir James; “I wish to act in the spirit of charity. It was the opinion, not only of myself⁠—for I have not that much confidence in my own judgment⁠—but the opinion of two or three gentlemen, well-judging men, that if I were to make an appeal to you in the matter, to implore you in confidence⁠—that is, if there is any explanation that can be given. We are all inclined to that view. I may seem harsh, because my heart is just sick to think of it; but we are all inclined to believe that an explanation would be possible. Of course, it is needless to say that if there is no explanation, neither the law permits, nor would we wish to lead, any one to criminate himself.”</p>
			<p>“Sir James,” said John, “you have made me a strange speech. There is a great deal of offence in it; but I do not wish to notice the offence. Speak out! I know no dreadful event that has happened in the country but poor Torrance’s death. Do you mean to tell me that you suspect <em>me</em> of having any hand in that?”</p>
			<p>Sir James looked up at him from the hat which he was pressing unconsciously in his hands. His countenance was full of distress, every line moving, his eyes moist and agitated. “My poor lad!” he said, “God knows, we’re all ready to make allowances for a moment’s passion! A man that has been hurried by impulse into a sudden step⁠—that has consequences he never dreamt of⁠—he will sometimes try to hide it, and make it look far worse⁠—far worse! Openness is the only salvation in such a case. It was thought that you might confide in me, an old man that has ever been friendly to you. For God’s sake, John Erskine, speak out!”</p>
			<p>“What do you suppose I can have to say?” said John, impressed, in spite of himself and all his instinctive resistance, by the anxious countenance and pleading tones of the kind old man who had been charged with such an office. He was so much startled and awed by the apparent consent of so many to attribute something to him⁠—something which he began dimly to divine without even guessing how far public opinion had gone⁠—that the colour went out of his cheeks, and his breath came quick with agitation. Such signs of excitement may be read in many ways. To Sir James they looked like remorseful consciousness and alarm.</p>
			<p>“We are all very willing to believe,” he said, slowly, “that you took the beast by the bridle, perhaps in self-defence. He was an incarnate devil when he was roused⁠—poor fellow! He would have ridden a man down in his temper. You did that, meaning nothing but to hold him off⁠—and the brute reared. If you had raised an alarm then and there, and told the circumstances, little blame, if any, could have been laid on you. Silence was your worst plan⁠—your worst plan! That’s the reason why I have come to you. You took fright instead, and hurried away without a word, but not without tokens on you of your scuffle. If you would open your heart now, and disclose all the circumstances, it might not be too late.”</p>
			<p>John stood gazing speechless, receiving into his mind this extraordinary revelation with an almost stupefying sense of how far the imagination had gone. What was it his countrymen thought him guilty of? Was it murder⁠—<em>murder</em>? The light seemed to fail from his eyes for a moment; his very heart grew sick. He had time to run through all the situation while the old man laboured slowly through this speech, hesitating often, pausing for the most lenient words, anxiously endeavouring to work upon the feelings of the supposed culprit. With horror and a sudden panic, he perceived how all the circumstances fitted into this delusion, and that it was no mere piece of folly, but a supposition which might well seem justified. He remembered everything in the overpowering light thus poured upon the scene: his torn coat, his excitement⁠—nay, more, the strong possibility that everything might have happened just as his neighbours had imagined it to have happened. And yet it had not been so; but how was he to prove his innocence? For a moment darkness seemed to close around him. Sir James’s voice became confused with a ringing in his ears; his very senses seemed to grow confused, and failed him. He heard the gasp in his own throat to get breath when silence ensued⁠—a silence which fell blank around him, and which he maintained unconsciously, with a blind stare at his accuser’s most gentle, most pitying countenance. How like it was to the scare and terror of blood-guiltiness suddenly brought to discovery!</p>
			<p>But gradually this sickness and blankness cleared off around him like a cloud, and he began to realise his position. “Sit down,” he said, hoarsely, “and I will tell you every particular I know.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
