<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>Beaufort drove home on that eventful afternoon by himself. He had left his friend in the county jail, in a state in which surprise was still perhaps the predominant feeling. John had said little on the way, except to point out, with something which perhaps bore the character of bravado, the new features of the landscape beyond Dunearn. ‚ÄúIt is an opportunity for you to see a little more of the country,‚Äù he said, with a smile. Something of the same indignant amusement which had been his first apparent sensation on hearing the sheriff‚Äôs decision was still in his manner now. He held his head high and a little thrown back, his nostrils were dilated, his eyes more widely open and alert than usual, and a smile in which there was a little scorn was upon his face. Those who did not know John or human nature might have thought him unusually triumphant, excited by some occurrence which enhanced instead of humiliating his pride. ‚ÄúI cannot tell you how surprised I am to see you here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine,‚Äù said the governor of the jail with consternation. ‚ÄúYou cannot be more surprised than I am,‚Äù said John. He gave his orders about the things he wanted in the same tone, taking no notice of the anxious suggestion that it would only be for a few days. He was too deeply offended with fate to show it. He only smiled and said, ‚ÄúThe first step is so extraordinary that I prefer not to anticipate the next.‚Äù ‚ÄúBut they must allow you bail,‚Äù said Beaufort; ‚Äúthat must be my first care.‚Äù John laughed. He would not condescend to be anxious. ‚ÄúOr hang me,‚Äù he said; ‚Äúthe one just as sensible as the other.‚Äù Beaufort drove away with the strangest feelings, guiding his friend‚Äôs horse along the road with which he was so little acquainted, but from which presently he saw the great house of Tinto on one side, and on the other the towers of Lindores appearing from among the trees. How hard it was to keep his thoughts to John, with these exciting objects on either side of him! This country road, which all its length kept him in sight of the big castellated front of Tinto, with its flag half-mast high‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe house in which she was who had been his love and promised bride‚ÅÝ‚Äîseemed to Beaufort to have become the very thread of his fate. That Carry should be there within his reach, that she should be free and mistress of herself, that there should be even a certain link of connection which brought him naturally once more within the circle of her immediate surroundings, was so wonderful that everything else seemed of less importance. He could not disengage his thoughts from this. He was not a man in whose mind generosity was the first or even a primary quality, and it is so difficult to think first of another when our own affairs are at an exciting stage. The only step which he could think of for John‚Äôs advantage confused him still more, for it was the first direct step possible to put him once more in contact with Carry. He turned up the avenue of Lindores with a thrill of sensation which penetrated his whole being. He was relieved indeed to know that the ladies were not there‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat he would not at least be exposed to their scrutiny, and to the self-betrayal that could scarcely fail to follow; but the very sight and name of the house was enough to move him almost beyond his errand. The last rays of the sunset had gone out, and the autumn evening began to darken by the time he got there. He went on like a man in a dream, feeling the very air about him tremulous with his fate, although he made an attempt to think of John first. How could he think of anything but of Carry, who was free? or recollect anything except that the mistress of this house had allowed him to call her mother; and that even its lord, before he was its lord, had not refused to permit the suggestion of a filial relationship? There was a carriage already standing before the door when he drove up, but his mind was by this time too much excited to be moved by any outside circumstance. But when he stepped into the hall upon his mission, and, following the servant to the presence of Lord Lindores, suddenly found himself face to face with the two ladies going out, Beaufort‚Äôs agitation was extreme. They were returning to Tinto, after a day‚Äôs expedition in search of those ‚Äúthings‚Äù which seem always necessary in every domestic crisis. Lady Lindores recognised him with a start and cry of amazement. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort! you here!‚Äù she cried, unable to contain herself. She added, ‚Äúat such a time!‚Äù in a lower tone, with the self-betrayal to which impulsive persons are always liable, and with so much indignation mingled with her astonishment, that a man in full possession of his faculties might have drawn from it the most favourable auguries. But Beaufort, to do him justice, was not cool enough for this. He said hurriedly, ‚ÄúI came on Thursday‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI knew nothing. I came‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause it was impossible to help it.‚Äù Edith had come close up behind her mother, and grasped her arm, half in support, half in reproof. ‚ÄúYou knew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort was coming, mamma; why should you be surprised?‚Äù she said, with a certain disdain in the tone with which she named him. Edith was unreasonable, like all the rest. She would have had him throw away everything rather than come here to interfere with Carry‚Äôs comfort, notwithstanding that her own father had invited him to come, and though it had been explained to her that all his prospects depended upon the favour of the Duke, Lord Millefleurs‚Äôs gracious papa. Her idea was, that a man should have thrown away all that, rather than put himself in a false position, or expose a woman whom he had once loved to embarrassment and pain. They were all unreasonable together, but each in his or her characteristic way. After these first utterances of agitation, however, they all stopped short and looked at each other in the waning light, and awoke to a recollection of the ordinary conventionalities which in such circumstances are so great a relief to everybody concerned.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe must not detain you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort,‚Äù Lady Lindores said; ‚Äúyou were going to my husband‚ÅÝ‚Äîor Lord Millefleurs‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho is still here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The last four words were said with a certain significance, as if intended for a hint‚ÅÝ‚Äîpersuade him, they seemed to say, that this is not a time to remain here. ‚ÄúIt is getting late, mother,‚Äù said Edith, with a touch of impatience.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOne moment, Lady Lindores. I must tell you why I have come: not for myself‚ÅÝ‚Äîto ask help for Erskine, whom I have just left in custody, charged with having occasioned somehow‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI can‚Äôt tell you how‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe death of‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe late accident‚ÅÝ‚Äîyour son-in-law,‚Äù Beaufort stammered out.</p>
			<p>The next moment he seemed to be surrounded by them, by their cries of dismay, by their anxious questions. A sharp keen pang of offence was the first feeling in Beaufort‚Äôs mind‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat John should be so much more interesting to them than he was! It gave him a shock even in the excitement of the moment.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis was what he meant‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe could at last hear Edith distinctly after the momentary babel of mutual exclamations‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúthis was what he meant: that we might hear something, which he might not be able to explain, but that we were to believe in him‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou and I, mamma.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course we believe in him,‚Äù cried Lady Lindores; ‚Äúbut something else must be done, something more. Come this way, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort; Lord Lindores is here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She called him <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort without any hesitation now‚ÅÝ‚Äînot pausing, as she had done before, with the more familiar name on her lips. It was John who was in the foreground now‚ÅÝ‚ÄîJohn who, perhaps, for anything they knew, had caused the event which had put them in mourning. With a whimsical mortification and envy, Beaufort exaggerated in his own mind the distress caused by this event. For the moment he looked upon it as a matter of real loss and pain to this unthinking family who showed such interest in the person who perhaps‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut the sentiment did not go so far as to be put into words; it resolved itself into a half-indignant wonder at the interest taken in John, and sense of injured superiority on his own account‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe, of whom no man could say that he had been instrumental in causing the death even of a dog.</p>
			<p>Lady Lindores led the way hastily into the library, where three figures were visible against the dim light in the window as the others came in. Lord Lindores, seated in his chair; little Millefleurs, leaning against the window, half turned towards the landscape; and in front of the light, with his back to it, Rintoul, who was speaking. ‚ÄúWith you as bail,‚Äù he was saying, ‚Äúhe may be set free tonight. Don‚Äôt let him be a night in that place.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAre you speaking of John Erskine, Robin, my dear boy? Oh, not a night, not an hour! Don‚Äôt lose any time. It is too dreadful, too preposterous. Your father will go directly. Take the carriage, which is at the door. If we are a little late, what does it matter?‚Äù said Lady Lindores, coming forward, another shadow in the dim light. Millefleurs turned half round, but did not come away from the window on which he was leaning. He was somewhat surprised too, very curious, perhaps a trifle indignant, to see all this fuss made about Erskine. He drew up his plump little person, altogether indifferent to the pronounced manifestation of all its curves against the light, and looked beyond Lady Lindores to Edith‚ÅÝ‚ÄîEdith, who hurried after her mother, swift and silent, as if they were one being, moved by the same unnecessary excitement. Millefleurs had not been in a comfortable state of mind during these last days. The delay irritated him; though Lord Lindores assured him that all was well, he could not feel that all was well. Why should not Edith see him, and give him his answer? She was not so overwhelmed with grief for that brute. What did it mean? And now, though she could not see him on such urgent cause, she was able to interest herself in this eager way on behalf of John Erskine! Millefleurs was very tolerant, and when the circumstances demanded it, could be magnanimous, but he thought he had reason of offence here.</p>
			<p>There was a momentary pause‚ÅÝ‚Äîenough to show that Lord Lindores did not share the feeling so warmly expressed. ‚ÄúI am surprised that you should all be so inconsiderate,‚Äù he said; ‚Äúyou, at least, Rintoul, who generally show more understanding. I have understood that Erskine had laid himself under suspicion. Can you imagine that I, so near a connection of poor Torrance, am the right person to interfere on behalf perhaps of his‚ÅÝ‚Äîmurd‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is to say, of the cause‚ÅÝ‚Äîof the instrument‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt is impossible,‚Äù cried Edith, with such decision that her soft voice seemed hard‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúimpossible! Can anyone suppose for a moment‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBe silent, Edith,‚Äù cried her father.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy should she be silent?‚Äù said Lady Lindores. ‚ÄúRobert, think what you are saying. We have all known John Erskine for years. He is as incapable as I am‚ÅÝ‚Äîas unlikely as any one of us here. Because you are so near a connection, is not that the very reason why you should interfere? For God‚Äôs sake, think of that poor boy in prison‚ÅÝ‚Äîin prison! and lose no time.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will do it, mother,‚Äù said Rintoul.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, God bless you, my boy! I knew you were always right at heart.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúRintoul,‚Äù said his father, ‚Äúenthusiasm of this sort is new in you. Let us take a little common sense into the question. In the first place, nothing can be done tonight‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is evident. Then consider a moment: what does ‚Äòin prison‚Äô mean? In the governor‚Äôs comfortable rooms, where he will be as well off as at home; and probably‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor he is not without sense‚ÅÝ‚Äîwill be taking the most reasonable view of the matter. He will know perfectly well that if he deserves it he will find friends; in short, that we are all his friends, and that everybody will be too glad to assist him‚ÅÝ‚Äîas soon as he has cleared himself‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAs soon as he wants it no longer,‚Äù cried Lady Lindores.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy dear, you are always violent; you are always a partisan,‚Äù said her husband, drawing back his chair a little, with the air of having ended the discussion; and there was a pause‚ÅÝ‚Äîone of those breathless pauses of helplessness, yet rebellion, which make sick the hearts of women. Lady Lindores clasped her hands together with a despairing movement. ‚ÄúThis is the curse of our life,‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúI can do nothing; I cannot go against your father, Edith, and yet I am neither a fool nor a child. God help us women! we have to stand by, whatever wrong is done, and submit‚ÅÝ‚Äîsubmit. That is all that is left for us to do‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSubmit!‚Äù Edith said. She was young and strong, and had not learned her lesson. It galled her beyond endurance. She stood and looked round her, seeing the whiteness of the faces, but little else in the evening gloom. Was it true that there was nothing‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing in her power? In poetry, a girl can throw herself on her knees, can weep and plead‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut only weep and plead; and she, who had not been trained to that, who was conscious of her individuality, her independent mind and judgment in every nerve‚ÅÝ‚Äîheaven above! was she as helpless still? She stood breathless for a moment, with wondering eyes fixed on the darkness, with a gasp of proud resistance to fate. Submit to injustice, to cruel heartlessness of those who could aid, to still more cruel helplessness‚ÅÝ‚Äîimpotence, on her own part? She stood for a moment gazing at the blank wall that seemed to rise before her, as the poor, the helpless have to do‚ÅÝ‚Äîas women have to do in all circumstances. It was her first experience in this kind. She had been proud to know that she was not as Carry, that no tyranny could crush her spirit: but this was different. She had not anticipated such a trial as this. There came from her bosom one sob of supreme pain which she could not keep in. Not for John only, whom she could not help in his moment of need, but for herself also‚ÅÝ‚Äîto feel herself impotent, helpless, powerless as a child.</p>
			<p>Millefleurs came forward from the window hurriedly. Perhaps being so much a man of his time it was he who understood that gasp of suffering best. He said, ‚ÄúLady Edith, if I can help‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù quickly, on the impulse of the moment; then, thorough little gentleman as he was, checked himself. ‚ÄúLady Lindores, though I am a stranger, yet my name is good enough. Tell me what to do and I will do it. Perhaps it is better that Lord Lindores should not commit himself. But I am free, don‚Äôt you know,‚Äù he said, with something of the easy little chirrup of more ordinary times. Why was it that, at such a moment, Edith, of all others, in her personal despair, should burst out into that strange little laugh? She grasped her mother‚Äôs arm with both hands in her excitement. Here was a tragic irony and ridicule penetrating the misery of the crisis like a sharp arrow which pricked the girl to the very heart.</p>
			<p>This sympathiser immediately changed the face of affairs. Lord Lindores, indeed, continued to hold himself apart, pushing back his chair once more; but even to Lord Lindores, Millefleurs made a difference. He said no more about enthusiasm or common sense, but listened, not without an occasional word of direction. They clustered together like a band of shadows against the great window, which was full of the paleness of the night. Beaufort, who was the person most acquainted with all the circumstances, recovered his sense of personal importance as he told his story. But after all, it was not as the narrator of John Erskine‚Äôs story that he cared to gain importance in the eyes of Carry‚Äôs family, any more than it was as bail for John Erskine that Lord Millefleurs desired to make himself agreeable to the ladies at Lindores. Both of the strangers, thus caught in the net of difficulties and dangers which surrounded their old comrade, resented it more or less; but what could they do? Edith took no further part in the consultation. She retired behind her mother, whose arm she continued to hold firm and fast in both her hands. When she was moved by the talk going on at her side she grasped that arm tightly, which was her only sign of emotion, but for the rest retired into the darkness where no one could see, and into herself, a still more effectual retirement. Lady Lindores felt that her daughter‚Äôs two hands clasping her were like a sort of anchor which Edith had thrown out in her shipwreck to grasp at some certainty. She bore the pressure with a half smile and sigh. She too had felt the shipwreck with keen passion, still more serious than that of Edith: but she had no one to anchor to. She felt this, half with a grateful sense of what she herself was still good for; but still more, perhaps, with that other personal sense which comes to most‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat with all the relationships of life still round her, mother and wife, she, for all solace and support, was like most of us virtually alone.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
