<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>When the news of the approaching festivities at Dalrulzian were known in Dunearn, Miss Barbara Erskine and her household were flung into a whirlpool of excitement such as had not disturbed their calm for more years than could be reckoned. There was, of course, no question as to the immediate acceptance by the old lady of her nephew’s invitation to her to do the honours of his house. She was very much touched and pleased⁠—with that satisfaction, above all, which is so sweet to a woman⁠—of feeling that John was doing absolutely “the right thing” in placing her, his old aunt, at the head of affairs. It was a compliment to the family, to the old neighbours, as well as to herself. But it is not too much to say that from the scullery to the drawing-room her house was turned upside-down by this great event. Miss Barbara’s first thought was, as was natural, that a great many things would be wanted. She went instantly to her “napery” closet⁠—Agnes, her old maid, attending her with the key⁠—and brought out stores of shining damask, milk-white and fragrant, every tablecloth with its pile of napkins, like a hen with chickens. “I never inquired into the napery at Dalrulzian,” the old lady said; “but it would be a great temptation to a woman with a sma’ family to take the use of it; and for anything I know, he may be in want of table-linen. Ye’ll pack a boxful, Agnes, whether or no. There’s the great table-cloths with the crown pattern, they are the biggest I have. Ye’ll take them, and table-napkins. You may take ten or twelve dozen. They are always useful.”</p>
			<p>“And you’ll take the best silver, mem,” said Janet, for this was in her department. If it had been suggested to them that their best Paisley shawls, on which both Janet and Agnes set great store, would have been useful to cover the faded places on the carpet, these devoted women would have sacrificed their most cherished possessions. Miss Barbara’s old epergnes and table ornaments, which, happily, were older and less solid than the camel and palm-trees at Tinto, were packed into a huge box, with all her available forks and spoons, and sent off in a cart before her to the scene of the entertainment. Then a still more important question arose as to the help that would be required to produce a dinner and a ball-supper worthy of the Erskine name. Miss Barbara put her trust in Janet, who had managed all her own household affairs for a great number of years. “I’ll take ye both with me,” she said to the two women, who made her comfort and credit the occupation of their lives, “and when ye consider what’s at stake, you’ll just put your hand to anything; and ye like a ploy, both of ye, and plenty of young faces about the house.”</p>
			<p>“Eh, but I do that,” said Agnes; “and I would not wonder but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John’s meaning to take a survey of all the misses, and him a wanter and a bonnie lad into the bargain. We’ll maybe hear who it is to be.”</p>
			<p>But Janet demurred. “It’s not to be denied but I would like to go,” she said; “and blithe, blithe would I be to put to my hand, if it was only to boil a pitawtie, and proud to think the auld family, so lang away, was holding up its head again. But then there’s Bauby Rolls, that’s been housekeeper so long, and a good cook and a good woman. She would think we meant to interfere.”</p>
			<p>“It would ill become either Bauby or any other person to think me interfering in my nephew’s house,” said Miss Barbara. “Ye’ll just come, Janet. I am saying nothing against Bauby; but she’ll be out of the way of managing for a pairty.”</p>
			<p>“There are plenty of pairties in the winter-time,” said Janet. “I wouldna stand in other folk’s gait. Na, naebody would say <i>you</i> were interfering, Miss Barbara. Wha has a better right in your ain nephew’s house?⁠—but me, it’s another question. I couldna gang ben to her kitchen, or look at a single article, but it would be thought I was meddling. What would I think if Bauby Rolls came here on a veesit to help me? I would say I maun be getting doited, though I cannot see it: I maun be losing the use o’ my faculties. I judge of her by mysel’. She would think the same of me. But Agnes, you can take her,” said the housekeeper, with a fine and delicate contempt. “She has aye her head full of whigmaleeries; but she’ll stand in nobody’s way.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll not ask your leave, Janet, to take my own woman with me,” said Miss Barbara, with some annoyance.</p>
			<p>“Na, mem, I never thought that,” retorted her factotum. “I’m seldom consulted, though maybe it would be none the worse for the family if I were letten say my say. For a ball-supper there’s naething better than a fine boned turkey well stuffed and larded,” she added, reflectively; “and I’m no’ against soup. It’s new-fashioned; but there’s new-fashioned things that’s just as good as the old. One thing I set my face against is thae new drinks⁠—Cup as they call them. They take an awfu’ quantity of wine; and in the heat o’ the dancing thae young things will just spoil their stomachs, never thinking what they’re swallowing. That’s my opinion. I’m no’ saying I’m ony authority, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Rolls will have a’ that in his hands, and will not lippen to a woman; but that’s my opinion. It’s an awfu’ waste of wine. I would rather give them good honest champagne out of the bottle, that they might see what they are taking, far sooner than that wasteful Cup.”</p>
			<p>“That’s very true, Janet,” said Miss Barbara; “I’m of that opinion myself. But in most houses it’s the gentleman himself (when there is a gentleman) that manages the cellar; and it would never do for a lady to say anything. But I will mind to tell him (for it’s my own opinion), if he consults me.”</p>
			<p>“And for sweet things, there’s nothing like ice-creams, if she can make them,” said Janet. “If she were to say, mem, of her own accord, that she has little experience, you might send me a line by the postman, and I would do my best; but no’ unless it’s of her own accord. Na, na; I ken by mysel’. If a strange woman were to come into my kitchen and meddle with my denner! But tak’ you Agnes, Miss Barbara. She might make up a match yet, for a’ that’s come and gane, with Tammas Rolls.”</p>
			<p>Miss Barbara appeared accordingly at Dalrulzian the day before the great dinner, in her old coach, with her two best gowns in the imperial, and all her old ornaments, and with Agnes her maid seated primly by her, inside. The chariot was almost as old as Miss Barbara herself, and was kept for great occasions. It was drawn by two somewhat funereal black horses from the Red Lion at Dunearn⁠—altogether a solemn turn-out, and quite unlike the handy little phaeton in which usually the old lady drove about. The postboy took away those noble steeds when he had housed the chariot in the Dalrulzian stables, to which he was to return in four days to take it back with its mistress. And Miss Barbara bore a grave though cheerful countenance as she walked into the drawing-room, and took her place there on the great tapestry sofa. The box of plate and linen had arrived before her, and she felt that it was necessary at once to look into the details of the proposed entertainment. “Will you send the housekeeper to me,” she said to Rolls, with dignity, thinking it beneath the solemnity of the occasion to call Bauby by any less weighty title. Bauby came in with good-natured alacrity; but she was somewhat abashed by the air of gravity on Miss Barbara’s face, whom she was not accustomed to see in such state. “Come in, my woman,” said the old lady. “It’s a great responsibility for you to have the charge of all this. You will like a little assistance with your dinner. I’m well aware that both that and the supper for the ball are in very good hands so far as the provisions go. But your master being young, and without experience, and as there’s no lady in the house, I think it my duty to be of service,” Miss Barbara said. Bauby stood before her greatly flushed, and laid a number of hems, one over the other, on her apron. “Hoot, mem, we’ll just manage fine,” she said, growing red. But this did not satisfy the august old lady.</p>
			<p>“If you’re in want of any help,” she said, “there’s a woman of mine⁠—”</p>
			<p>Rolls, who had been waiting outside the door, came to the rescue. He appeared behind the flushed Bauby. “She’s a confused creature,” he said, “but she knows her business. We’ve put it all down, Miss Barbara, in the new-fashioned way. I’m aware that at the Castle and other grand places it’s written in French, but good Scots is good enough for us.”</p>
			<p>It was no small effort to find and produce from Bauby’s pocket the bill of fare of the approaching dinner. But this document took away Miss Barbara’s breath. It was some time before she got over it. Instead of the chaos which she half feared, yet half hoped for, as a means of exercising her own gifts on her nephew’s behalf, it was an elaborate <i>menu</i>, drawn out in full form, that was placed before her eyes. The old lady was struck dumb for a moment, and when she spoke there was a certain awe in her tone. “If you can set a dinner like that on the table,” she said, “I have not a word to say.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, mem, we’ll manage fine,” said Bauby, in her soft, round, good-humoured voice.</p>
			<p>“Miss Barbara,” said Rolls, “I’m no braggart; but I’ve seen a thing or two in my life. And Bauby, she has far more in her than appears. She’s just a confused creature in speech; but pit her to her goblets and her sauces, and she kens well what she’s about. She has the real spirit of it in her; and when her blood’s up for the credit of the family⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Eh, mem!” cried Bauby herself, putting her apron to her eyes, for her tears came readily; “do you think I would let them say that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John couldna give a denner as good as the best? and he such a fine lad, and wanting a wife, and his mammaw so far away!”</p>
			<p>“Never you mind his mammaw,” cried Miss Barbara, with natural family feeling; “she was never a great manager. But if you set that dinner on the table, Bauby Rolls, you’re a woman worthy of all respect, and I hope my nephew will know when he’s well off.”</p>
			<p>She withdrew to the room prepared for her after this, a little crestfallen, yet doing due honour to the native powers. “We’ll say nothing to Janet,” she said to her faithful old maid, as she sat at her toilet. “Janet is an excellent woman, and just the right person for a house like mine. But she has not that invention. Four made dishes, besides all the solids! We’ll not say a word to Janet. It would be more than she could bear.”</p>
			<p>“You see, Miss Barbara, there’s two of them to settle it,” said Agnes, as she brushed out the old lady’s abundant white hair; “and a man is awfu’ discriminating about eating and drinking. He may not have sense like a woman, but he has more taste of his mouth.”</p>
			<p>“There is something in that,” said her mistress; “if it’s Rolls, John has got a treasure in that man. The Cornel’s dinners were always very English, to my way of thinking⁠—but that would be their own fault; or if it’s my nephew himself⁠—” she added, doubtfully. What was a great quality in Rolls catering for other people, would have been almost a vice, in the eyes of this prejudiced old lady, in the young master of the house.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John!” said Agnes, still more moved⁠—“a bonnie lad like him! Na, na; it would never be that. It’ll be the young misses, and not the dishes, he will be thinking about. And who knows but we may see the one that’s his choice? And I wish she may be a lovely young lady for his sake.”</p>
			<p>“She would need to be something more than that,” said Miss Barbara, shaking her head. “A little money would be a great advantage to the estate.”</p>
			<p>“Eh, but mem, he maun marry for love,” said Agnes; “what’s siller in comparison? And I think I know Somebody for my pairt⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Whisht, Agnes,” said her mistress peremptorily; “whatever thought may be in your head, to name it spoils all.”</p>
			<p>For these two simple women were still of opinion that Providence had created John Erskine’s wife for him, and that he could not mistake the guidance of that unerring hand.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
