<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>It happened after this that John Erskine, by no will of his own, was drawn repeatedly into the society of the somewhat lonely pair at Tinto. Torrance had never been popular, though the county extended to him that toleration which a rich man, especially when young, is apt to receive. There were always benevolent hopes that he might mend as long as he remained unmarried; and after his marriage, his wife bore the blame of more than half his misdeeds. To tell the truth, poor Carry, being so unhappy, did not take pains to conciliate her neighbours. Some she took up with almost feverish eagerness, and she had two or three impassioned friends; but she had none of that sustaining force of personal happiness which makes it possible to bear the weariness of dull country company, and she had not taken any particular pains to please the county: so that, except on the periodical occasions when the great rooms were thrown open to a large party, she and her husband, so little adapted as they were to indemnify each other for the loss of society, lived much alone in their great house, with none of that coming and going which enlivens life. And since what he called the satisfaction which John had given him, Torrance had experienced a sort of rough enthusiasm for his new neighbour. He was never weary of proclaiming him to be an honest fellow. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the way to meet a man,‚Äù he would say‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äústraightforward; if there‚Äôs any mistake, say it out.‚Äù And Erskine was overwhelmed with invitations to ‚Äúlook in as often as he pleased,‚Äù to ‚Äútake pot-luck,‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîto come over to Tinto as often as he wearied. Sometimes he yielded to those solicitations out of pity for poor Carry, who seemed, he thought, pleased to see him; and sometimes because, in face of this oppressive cordiality, it was difficult to say no. He did not enjoy these evenings; but the soft look of pleasure in poor Carry‚Äôs eyes, the evident relief with which she saw him come in, went to John‚Äôs heart. Not a word had passed between them on the subject which all their neighbours discussed so fully. No hint of domestic unhappiness crossed Carry‚Äôs lips: and yet it seemed to John that she had a kind of sisterly confidence in him. Her face brightened when he appeared. She did not engage him in long intellectual conversations as she did <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝStirling. She said, indeed, little at all to him, but she was grateful to him for coming, and relieved from that which she would not complain of or object to‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe sole society of her husband. This consciousness touched John more than if he had been entirely in her confidence. A kind of unspoken alliance seemed to exist between them.</p>
			<p>One evening when June was nearly over in the long never-ending Northern daylight, this tacit understanding was at once disturbed and intensified. John had been captured by his too cordial neighbour in the languid afternoon when he had nothing to do, and had been feeling somewhat drearily the absence of occupation and society. Torrance could not supply him with either, but his vacant condition left him without excuse or power to avoid the urgent hospitality. He had walked to Tinto in all the familiarity of county neighbourhood, without evening dress or ceremony of any kind. They had dined without the epergnes and mountains of silver which Torrance loved, in the low dining-room of the old house of Tinto, which still existed at one end of the great modern mansion. This room opened on the terrace which surrounded the house, with an ease not possible in the lofty Grecian erection, well elevated from the ground, which formed the newer part. Lady Caroline, who had left the gentlemen some time before, became visible to them as they sat at their wine, walking up and down the terrace with her baby in her arms. The child had been suffering from some baby ailment, and had been dozing a great part of the day, which made it unwilling to yield to sleep when evening came. The mother had brought it out wrapped in a shawl, and was singing softly to lull it to rest. The scene was very tranquil and sweet. Sunset reflections were hanging still about the sky, and a pearly brightness was diffused over the horizon‚ÅÝ‚Äîlight that looked as if it never meant to fade. The trees of the park lay in clustered masses at their feet, the landscape spread out like a map beyond, the hills rose blue against the ethereal paleness of the distance. Close at hand, Lady Caroline‚Äôs tall, pliant figure, so light and full of languid grace, yet with a suggestion of weakness which was always pathetic, went and came‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe child‚Äôs head upon her shoulder, her own bent over it‚ÅÝ‚Äîmoving softly, singing under her breath. The two men, sitting together with little conversation or mutual interest between them, were roused by the sight of this passing figure. Even Tinto‚Äôs rude gaze was softened by it. He looked out at his wife and child with something more like human tenderness than was usual to him. Himself for a moment gave place in the foreground to this embodiment of the nearest and closest ties of life. He stopped in the talk which he was giving forth at large in his usual loud monologue, unaffected by any reply, and something softened the big balls of his light projecting eyes. ‚ÄúLet‚Äôs step outside and finish our cigars,‚Äù he said, abruptly. Lady Caroline herself looked different from her wont. The child against her heart soothed the pain in it: there is no such healing application. It was not a delightful child, but it was her own. One of its arms was thrown round her neck; its head, heavy with sleep, to which it would not yield, now nestled into her shoulder, now rose from it with a sleepy half-peevish cry. She was wholly occupied with the little perverse creature, patting it with one thin soft hand, murmuring to it. The little song she was crooning was contemptible so far as music went, but it was soft as a dove‚Äôs cooing. She had forgotten herself, and her woes, and her shipwrecked life. Even when that harsher step came out on the gravel, she did not recognise it with her usual nervous start. All was soothed and softened in the magical evening calm, in the warm softness of the baby, lying against the ache in its mother‚Äôs heart.</p>
			<p>And Torrance, for a wonder, did not disturb this calm. He stopped to touch the child‚Äôs cheek with his finger as his wife passed him, but as this broke once more the partial slumber, he subsided into quiet with a sense of guiltiness, puffing his cigar at intervals, but stepping as lightly as he could with his heavy feet, and saying nothing. A touch of milder emotion had come to his rude bosom. Not only was that great park, those woods, and a large share of the surrounding country, his own, but this woman with her baby was his, his property, though so much more delicate, and finer than he. This moved him with a kind of wondering sense of the want of something which amid so much it might yet be possible to attain‚ÅÝ‚Äîhappiness, perhaps, in addition to possession. His breast swelled with pride in the thought that even while thus engrossed in the humblest feminine occupation, like any cottager, nobody could mistake Lady Car Torrance for anything less than she was. They might think her a princess, perhaps. He did not know any princess that had that carriage, he said to himself; but less or meaner, nobody could suppose her to be. And he was touched to see her with his child, her whole soul‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat soul which had always eluded him, and retained its chill superiority to him‚ÅÝ‚Äîwrapped up in the baby, who was his as much as hers. There was in the air a kind of flutter of far-off wings, as if peace might be coming, as if happiness might be possible even between this ill-matched pair.</p>
			<p>John Erskine was the spectator in this curious domestic scene. He looked on with wondering, half-pleased, half-indignant observation. He was almost angry that Carry should be lowered to the level of this husband of hers, even if it gave her for a time a semblance of happiness; and yet his heart was touched by this possibility of better things. When the child went to sleep, she looked up at the two men with a smile. She was grateful to her husband for his silence, for bringing no disturbance of the quiet with him; and grateful to John for having, as she thought, subdued Torrance by his influence. She made to them both that little offering of a grateful smile as she sat down on the garden-seat, letting the child rest upon her knee. The baby‚Äôs head had slid down to her arm, and it lay there in the complete and perfect repose which a mother‚Äôs arms, protecting, sustaining, warm, seem to give more than any bed. The air was so sweet, the quiet so profound, that Carry was pleased to linger out of doors. Not often had she shown any desire to linger in her husband‚Äôs society when not bound by duty to do so. This evening she did it willingly. For the moment, a <i>faux air</i> of well-being, of happiness and domestic peace, seemed to pervade the earth and the air. ‚ÄúIt is so sweet, it cannot do her any harm to stay out a little,‚Äù she said, smiling at them over the baby‚Äôs sleeping face, which was half hidden in the soft, fleecy white shawl that enveloped it. John Erskine sat down at a little distance, and Torrance stood with a half humility about him, half ashamed, willing to do or say something which would be tender and conciliatory, but not knowing how. They began to talk in low tones, Erskine and Carry bearing the <i>frais</i> of the conversation. Sometimes Torrance put in a word, but generally the large puffs of his cigar were his chief contribution. He was willing to let them talk. Nay, he was not without a certain pleasure, in this softened mood of his, in hearing them talk. He would have allowed freely that conversation was not in his way.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are coming now in about ten days,‚Äù Carry said. ‚ÄúOf course they have stayed longer than they meant to stay. People never leave town on the appointed day.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere are so many people to see.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd so many things are put off till the last. I remember how hurried we were‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow rapidly the days flew at the end.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou do not go to town now?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù she said, hurriedly; ‚Äúit is no deprivation. We‚ÅÝ‚Äîneither of us‚ÅÝ‚Äîcare for London.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Torrance felt a certain gratitude to his wife for thus identifying her inclinations with his. ‚ÄúIf truth were told, maybe that might be modified,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI daresay you would like it, Car. You would get people to talk to. That‚Äôs what amuses her,‚Äù he added, with an explanatory glance at John. It was a novel sort of pleasure to him to give this amiable explanation of Lady Caroline‚Äôs peculiarities, without any of the rough satire in it with which he was accustomed to treat the things he did not understand; and his constant pride in her found a new outlet. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs not gaieties she wants, it‚Äôs conversation,‚Äù he said, with a softened laugh. ‚ÄúNext year we must see if we can‚Äôt manage it, Car.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She turned to him with a startled glance, not knowing whether to deprecate all change so far as herself was concerned, or to thank him for this unusual thoughtfulness. Fortunately, her instinct chose the latter course. ‚ÄúIt is kind of you to think of me,‚Äù she said, in her soft voice. In all their wretched married life, they had never been so near before. He replied by his usual laugh, in which there was always a consciousness of that power of wealth which he could never forget he possessed. Oh yes, he would do it‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe could do it whenever he pleased‚ÅÝ‚Äîbuy pleasures for her, just as he might buy dresses or jewels for her, if she would take a little pains to make herself agreeable. But even the laugh was much softer than usual. She gave him a little nod over the sleeping child, in which there was kindness as well as an astonished gratitude. Perhaps she had never been so much at her ease with him before.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey are going to fill the house in the autumn,‚Äù she said, returning to the previous subject. ‚ÄúI hear of several people coming. A certain Lord Millefleurs‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat reminds me,‚Äù said John, ‚Äúthat I had a letter the other day‚ÅÝ‚Äîfrom one of our old Swiss party. You will remember him, Lady Caroline‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Here he paused, with a sudden recollection and putting together of various things which, in the curious inadvertence of an indifferent mind, he had not thought of before. This made him break off somewhat suddenly, and raise his eyes to Carry, at whom he had not been looking, with an alarmed glance.</p>
			<p>He saw her take a large grasp, in the hand which had been laid softly upon it, at ease, with extended fingers, of the baby‚Äôs shawl. Her face, which had been so smiling and soft, grew haggard and wild in a moment. Her eyes seemed to look out from caverns. There was a momentary pause, which seemed to arouse heaven and earth to listen. Then her voice came into this suddenly altered, vigilant, suspicious atmosphere. ‚ÄúWho was it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine?‚Äù Poor Carry tried to smile, and to keep her voice in its usual tone. But the arrow flying so suddenly at a venture had gone straight into her heart. She had no need to ask‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad she not divined it all along?</p>
			<p>‚ÄúProbably you have forgotten‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis very name. It was‚ÅÝ‚Äîone of those fellows,‚Äù stammered John. ‚ÄúI forget how little a party like ours was likely to interest you. Beaufort‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou may remember the name.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He felt that every word he uttered‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis artificial levity, his forced attempt to make that unimportant which only his consciousness that it was deeply important could have suggested such a treatment of, was a new folly. He was doing it for the best‚ÅÝ‚Äîmost futile of all excuses. When he looked at her again at the end of this speech, not daring to meet her eyes while he gave it forth, he saw, to his astonishment, a rising colour, a flutter of indignation, in Carry‚Äôs pale face.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSurely,‚Äù she said, with a strange thrill in her voice, ‚Äúyou do your friend injustice, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine. So far as I remember, he was very distinguished‚ÅÝ‚Äîfar the most remarkable of the party. I do not think I can be mistaken.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, no, you are quite right,‚Äù John cried; ‚ÄúI only meant that‚ÅÝ‚Äîthese things were much to us; but I did not know whether you would recollect‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhether to a lady‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou are all so contemptuous of women,‚Äù Lady Caroline said, with a faint smile, ‚Äúeven the kindest of you. You think a lady would only notice frivolous excellences, and would not care for real distinction. That is a great mistake. It is all the other way. It is we who think of these things most.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI beg a thousand pardons‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI had no such meaning,‚Äù John said; and she made him a little tremulous bow. She was so deadly pale, that he expected every moment to see her faint. But she did not. She continued, naturally calling him back to what he had been about to tell her.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou had a letter from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBeaufort? about‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou were going to tell me‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAbout coming here,‚Äù said John, feeling that to say it out bluntly was now the best. ‚ÄúIt appears he has a sort of charge of this Lord Millefleurs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCharge of Lord‚ÅÝ‚Äî? That is not a dignified position‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor‚ÅÝ‚Äîyour friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo. I don‚Äôt know what it means; he has not made the progress he ought to have made; but there is something special about this,‚Äù said John, hesitating, not knowing how far to go.</p>
			<p>Again Lady Caroline made him a little bow. She rose, with some stiffness and slowness, as if in pain. ‚ÄúIt grows late, though it is so light. Baby will be better indoors,‚Äù she said. She went quickly away, but wavering a little in her gait, as if she were unconscious of obstacles in the way, and disappeared through the window of the old library, which was on the same level as the dining-room. John stood looking after her, with a bewildering sense of guilt, and alarm for he knew not what. All this time Torrance had not said a word; but he had taken in every word that was said, and his jealous eyes had noted the changes in his wife‚Äôs face. He watched her go away, as John did. When she had disappeared, both of them listened for a moment in silence. Neither would have been surprised to hear a fall and cry; but there was nothing. Torrance threw himself down heavily in the seat from which she had risen.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat was a pity, Erskine,‚Äù he said; ‚Äúyou saw that well enough. You can tell me the rest about this Beaumont‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBeaufort‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat do you call him?‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat you thought it best not to tell Lady Car.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere is nothing to tell about Beaufort,‚Äù said John, ‚Äúwhich Lady Caroline, or any lady, might not hear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow just look you here, John Erskine,‚Äù said Tinto, projecting his big eyes, ‚ÄúI thought you were he‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is the truth. She told me there was somebody. I thought it was you, and I was determined to be at the bottom of it. Now here‚Äôs the man, beyond a doubt, and you know it as well as I do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know it at all,‚Äù cried John, ‚Äúwhich probably is as much as you do. Can you suppose I should have spoken to Lady Caroline as I did if I had supposed‚ÅÝ‚Äîbelieved‚ÅÝ‚Äîknown anything at all?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will say,‚Äù said Torrance, ‚Äúthat you‚Äôre an honest fellow. That stands to reason: you wouldn‚Äôt have opened your mouth if you had thought‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut then you never thought till after you had spoken. Then you saw it as well as me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTorrance!‚Äù cried John, ‚Äúfor heaven‚Äôs sake, don‚Äôt imagine things that were never thought of! I know nothing about it‚ÅÝ‚Äîabsolutely nothing. Even had there been anything in it, it is six years ago‚ÅÝ‚Äîit is all over; it never can have had anything to say to you‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, as for that,‚Äù said Torrance, ‚Äúif you think I‚Äôve any fear of Lady Car going wrong, set your mind at rest on that point. No fear of Lady Car. If you suppose I‚Äôm jealous, or that sort of thing‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîand here he laughed, insolent and dauntless. ‚ÄúI thought it was you,‚Äù he said‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI don‚Äôt see why I should conceal that‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI thought it was you. And if you think I would have shut her ladyship up, or challenged you!‚ÅÝ‚Äînot a bit of it, my fine fellow! I meant to have asked you here‚ÅÝ‚Äîto have seen you meet‚ÅÝ‚Äîto have taken my fun out of it. I‚Äôm no more afraid of Lady Car than I am of myself. Afraid!‚ÅÝ‚Äînot one bit. She shall see just as much of him as possible, if he comes here. I mean to ask him to the house. I mean to have him to dinner daily. You can tell him so, with my compliments. You needn‚Äôt say any more to Lady Car; but as for me, there‚Äôs nothing I‚Äôd enjoy more. Tutoring, is he?‚Äù Torrance said, with a sort of chuckle of wrathful enjoyment: and he cast an eye over his demesne, with a glow of proud satisfaction upon his face.</p>
			<p>The sentiment of the evening calm had altogether disappeared. The peace of nature was broken up; a sense of human torture, human cruelty, was in the air. It was as if a curtain had been lifted in some presence-chamber, and the rack disclosed beneath. Torrance lounged back‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith his hands in his pockets, his cheeks inflamed, his great eyes rolling‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the seat from which poor Carry with her baby had risen. His mind, which had been softened, touched to better things, and which had even begun to think of means and ways of making her happier, turned in a moment to more familiar preoccupations. To have <i>him</i> here‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe who was merely ‚Äútutoring,‚Äù a genteel attendant upon a foolish young lord‚ÅÝ‚Äîto exhibit him, probably penniless, probably snubbed by everybody around, a dependant, a man without position or wealth‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas an idea altogether delightful to him. It was indeed a fierce delight, a cruel pleasure; but it was more congenial to his mind than the unnatural softness of the hour before.</p>
			<p>And was it all John Erskine‚Äôs doing?‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis foolishness, his want of thought? When he left Torrance in disgust, and hurried away along the now familiar avenue, where he no longer took any wrong turns, his foolishness and thoughtlessness overwhelmed him. To be sure!‚ÅÝ‚Äîa thousand recollections rushed upon his mind. He had known it all along, and how was it that he had not known it? The moment he had committed himself and begun to speak of Beaufort‚Äôs letter, that moment he had foreseen everything that followed‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust as poor Carry had read what was coming in his first sentence. It was he who had disturbed the evening calm‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe <i>rapprochement</i> of the two who, doomed as they were to live their lives together, ought by all about them to be helped to draw near each other. Full of these disquieting thoughts, he was skirting a clump of thick shrubbery at some distance from the house, when something glided out from among the bushes and laid a sudden light touch upon his arm. He was already in so much excitement that he could not suppress a cry of alarm, almost terror. There was no light to distinguish anything, and the dark figure was confused with the dark foliage. Almost before the cry had left his lips, John entreated pardon. ‚ÄúYou are‚ÅÝ‚Äîbreathing the evening air,‚Äù he said, confused, ‚Äúnow that the little one is asleep.‚Äù</p>
			<p>But she had no leisure for any vain pretences. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine,‚Äù she said, breathless, ‚Äúdo not let him come‚ÅÝ‚Äîask him not to come! I have come out to tell you. I could not say it‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will do whatever you tell me, Lady Caroline.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI know you will be kind. This makes me very miserable. Oh, it is not that I could not meet him! It is because I know my husband has an idea‚ÅÝ‚Äînot that he is jealous‚ÅÝ‚Äîand he does not mean to be cruel‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut he has an idea‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHe would like to look on, to watch. That is what I could not bear. Tell him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine‚ÅÝ‚Äîbeg him‚ÅÝ‚Äîof all places in the world, not to come here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe will not come, I am sure, to give you a moment‚Äôs uneasiness.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine, I must say more to you,‚Äù she said, drawing closer, putting once more her hand on his arm. ‚ÄúIt must not be on that ground‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing must be said of me. Cannot you understand? He must not come; but not because of me‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing must be said of me. If it was your sister, oh would you not understand?‚Äù</p>
			<p>He took her hand into his in the profound feeling of the moment. ‚ÄúI will try to do‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat I should do if it were my own sister,‚Äù he said, resting it in his. ‚ÄúIt was my fault; I ought to have known.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere was no fault,‚Äù she said, faintly; ‚Äúan accident. I knew it must happen some time. I was‚ÅÝ‚Äîprepared. But, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝErskine, it is not because I could not meet‚ÅÝ‚Äîany one. Do not think that for me only‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIt is because‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBut if you understand, that is all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLet me walk back with you to the house,‚Äù John said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, no; it is almost wrong to speak to you in this clandestine way. But what can I do? And you who know‚ÅÝ‚Äîall parties‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIf I said anything to my brother, it might make a breach. There is no one I could speak to but you. I should have had to suffer helplessly, to hold my peace.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBelieve me‚ÅÝ‚Äîbelieve me,‚Äù cried John, ‚Äúall that a brother can do, I will do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>In the midst of this misery, which he felt to the bottom of his heart, there ran through him a secret stir of pleasure. Her brother!‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe suggestion went through all his veins. Strange encounter of the dream with the fact! The cold trembling hand he held in his gave him a thrill of warmth and happiness, and yet his sympathy was as strong, his pity as profound, as one human creature ever felt for another. He stood still and watched her as she flitted back to the house, like a shadow in the gathering darkness. His heart ached, yet beat high. If it should ever be so, how different would be the fate of the other daughter of Lindores‚Äôs!‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow he would guard her from every vexation, smooth every step of her way, strew it with flowers and sweetnesses! He resumed his way more quickly than ever, hastening along in the soft darkness which yet was not dark, by the Scaur‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe short cut which had alarmed his groom. To the pedestrian the way by the Scaur was the best way. He paused a moment when he reached it, to look out through the opening in the trees over the broad country, lying like a dream in that mystical paleness which was neither night nor day. Underneath, the river rushed joyously, noisily, through the night‚ÅÝ‚Äînot still, like a Southern stream, but dashing over the stones, and whirling its white eddies in foam against the bank. The sound of the water accompanied the quick current of his thoughts. He had a long walk before him, having come without preparation and left in haste and displeasure. But seven or eight miles of country road in a night of June is no such punishment. And the thoughts that had been roused in him, made the way short. How different‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow different would be the fate of that other daughter of Lindores‚Äôs! It was only when he reached his own gate that he woke up with a start to remember indeed how different it would be. The bare little white house, with its little plantation, its clump of firs on the hill-top, its scanty avenue‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe little estate, which could almost be said, with scornful exaggeration, to lie within the park of Tinto‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe position of a small squire‚Äôs wife‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas it likely that Lord Lindores would smile upon that for his daughter? John‚Äôs heart, which had been so buoyant, sank down into the depths. He began to see that his dream was ridiculous, his elation absurd. He to be the brother, in that sweetest way, of Carry Lindores! But nevertheless he vowed, as he went home somewhat crestfallen, that he would be a brother to her. She had given him her confidence, and he had given her his promise, and with this bond no worldly prudence nor rule of probabilities should be allowed to interfere.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
