<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>Old Rolls had been butler at Dalrulzian since John Erskine was a child. He had “stayed on” after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Erskine’s second marriage with reluctance, objecting seriously to a step-master at all, and still more to one that was an “English minister;” but the house had many attractions for him. He liked the place; his sister was the cook, a very stationary sort of woman, who had the greatest disinclination to move. She was a sort of human cat, large and smooth and good-natured, almost always purring, satisfied with herself and all who were moderately good to her; and, as was natural, she made the butler very comfortable, and was extremely attentive to all his little ways. When Colonel Barrington took the house, Rolls once more expressed his determination to leave. “What for?” said the placid Bauby; “the gentleman was keen to have a’ the servants⁠—a’ the servants that would bide.” “A’ the servants! there’s so many of us,” said Rolls, derisively. There was indeed only himself, the cook, and one housemaid; the other, who had charge of John in his earlier days, and still was attached to him more or less, had gone with the family⁠—and so, of course, had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Kingsford’s maid. “We’ll mak’ a grand show in the servants’ hall⁠—we’re just a garrison,” Rolls said. “We’re plenty for a’ the work there is the now,” said the mild woman, “and they’ll bring some with them. What ails ye to bide? You’re real well aff⁠—and me that kens exactly how you like your meat. Where would you be studied as I study you? You may just be thankful it’s in your power.” “It was with the Erskines I took service,” said Rolls. “I’m no sure that I could put up with strangers, and them just travelling English. Besides, I’ve never been clear that service is my vocation. A kent family is one thing, a foreign master another. Him and me would very likely no get on⁠—or them and me would no get on. All went very well in the last reign. Hairy Erskine was a gentleman, like all his forebears before him; but how am I to tell who is this Cornel, or whatever they ca’ him⁠—a man I never heard tell of before? I’ll give them over the keys, and maybe I’ll wait till they’re suited, but nobody can ask me to do more.”</p>
			<p>“Hoot, Tammas!” said his sister: which was the highest height of remonstrance she ever reached. Notwithstanding this, however, year after year Rolls had “stayed on.” He was very distinct in pointing out to “the Cornel” the superiority of his native masters, and the disadvantage to Scotland of having so many of the travelling English taking up the houses of the gentry; but he was an excellent servant, and his qualities in this way made up for his defects in the other⁠—if, indeed, those defects did not tell in his favour; for a Scotch servant who is a character is, like a ghost, a credit to any old and respectable house. The Barringtons were proud of old Rolls. They laid temptations in his way and made him talk whenever they had visitors; and his criticisms on the English, and the opinions which he freely enunciated on all subjects, had often kept the party in amusement. Rolls, however, had not been able to defend himself against a certain weakness for the children, specially for Nora, who was very small when the family came to Dalrulzian, and whom he had brought up, as he flattered himself, regretting much all the time that she was not an Erskine and natural-born daughter of the house. Rolls did not by any means see the departure of the Barringtons unmoved, notwithstanding that he hurried them away. He stood for a long time looking after the “coach,” which was a sort of rude omnibus, as it jolted down the avenue. The old servant stood in the clear morning air, through which every creak of the jingling harness and every jolt of the wheels sounded so distinctly, and the voice of Jock Beaton apostrophising his worn-out horse, and watched the lingering departure with feelings of a very mingled description. “There’s <i>feenis</i> put to that chapter,” he said to himself aloud. “We’re well rid of them.” But he lingered as long as the yellow panels could be seen gleaming through the trees at the turn of the road, without any of the jubilation in his face which he expressed in his words. At that last turn, just when the “coach” reached the highroad, something white was waved from the window, which very nearly made an end of Rolls. He uttered something which at first sounded like a sob, but was turned into a laugh, so to speak, before it fell into that tell-tale air which preserved every gradation of sound. “It’s that bit thing!” Rolls said, more sentimental than perhaps he had ever been in his life. His fine feeling was, however, checked abruptly. “You’re greetin’ yourself, Tammas,” said a soft round voice, interrupted by sobs, over his shoulder. “Me greetin’!”⁠—he turned round upon her with a violence that, if Bauby had been less substantial and less calm, would have driven her to the other end of the house; “I’m just laughin’ to see the nonsense you women-folk indulge in: but it’s paardonable in the case of a bit creature like Miss Nora. And I allow they have a right to feel it. Where will they find a bonnie place like Dalrulzian, and next to nothing in the way of rent or keeping up? But I’m thankful mysel’ to see the nest cleared out, and the real man in it. What are you whimpering about? It’s little you’ve seen of them, aye in your kitchen.” “Me seen little of them!” cried Bauby, roused to a kind of soft indignation; “the best part of an hour with the mistress every day of my life, and as kind a sympathising woman! There’ll be nae leddy now to order the dinners⁠—and that’s a great responsibility, let alone anything else.” “Go away with your responsibility. I’ll order your dinners,” said Rolls. “Well,” said Bauby, not without resignation, “to be a servant, and no born a gentleman, you’ve aye been awfu’ particular about your meat.” And she withdrew consoled, though drying her eyes, to wonder if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John would be “awfu’ particular about his meat,” or take whatever was offered to him, after the fashion of some young men. Meat, it must be explained, to Bauby Rolls meant food of all descriptions⁠—not only that which she would herself have correctly and distinctly distinguished as “butcher’s meat.”</p>
			<p>The house was very empty and desolate after all the din and bustle. The furniture had faded in the quarter of a century and more which had elapsed since Harry Erskine furnished his drawing-room for his bride. That had not been a good period for furniture, according to our present lights, and everything looked dingy and faded. The few cosy articles with which the late tenants had changed its character had been removed; the ornaments and prettinesses were all gone. The gay limp old chintzes, the faded carpet, the walls in sad want of renewal, obtruded themselves even upon the accustomed eye of Rolls. The nest might be cleared, but it looked a somewhat forlorn and empty nest. He stood upon the threshold of the drawing-room, contemplating it mournfully. A little of that “cheeney and nonsense” which he had been highly indignant with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Barrington for bringing, would have been of the greatest consequence now to brighten the walls; and a shawl or a hat thrown on a chair, which had called forth from old Rolls many a grumble in the past, would have appeared to him now something like a sign of humanity in the desert. But all that was over, and the old servant, painfully sensible of the difference in the aspect of the place, began to grow afraid of its effect upon the young master. If, after all, John should not be “struck with” his home! if, terrible to think of, he might prefer some house “in the South” to Dalrulzian! “But it’s no possible,” said Rolls to himself. He made a survey of all the rooms in the new anxiety that dawned upon him. The library was better; there were a good many books on the shelves, and it had not to Rolls the air of desertion the other rooms had. He lighted a fire in it, though it was the first week in May, and took great pains to restore by it an air of comfort and habitation. Then he took a walk down the avenue in order to make a critical examination of the house from a little distance, to see how it would look to the new-comer. And Rolls could not but think it a most creditable-looking house. The fir-trees on the top of the hill threw up their sombre fan of foliage against the sky; the birches were breathing forth a spring sweetness⁠—the thin young foliage softly washed in with that tenderest of greens against the darker background, seemed to appeal to the spectator, forbidding any hasty judgment, with the promise of something beautiful to come. The ash-trees were backward, no doubt, but they are always backward. In the wood the primroses were appearing in great clusters, and the parterres under the terrace were gay with the same. Rolls took comfort as he gazed. The avenue was all green, the leaves in some sunny corners quite shaken out of their husks, in all bursting hopefully. “It’s a bonnie place,” Rolls said to himself, with a sigh of excitement and anxiety. Bauby, who shared his feelings in a softened, fat, comfortable way of her own, was standing in the doorway, with her little shawl pinned over her broad chest, and a great white apron blazing in the light of the morning sun. She had a round face, like a full moon, and a quantity of yellow hair smoothed under the white cap, which was decorously tied under her chin. She did not take any of the dignity of a housekeeper-cook upon her, but she was a comfortable creature to behold, folding her round arms, with the sleeves rolled up a little, and looking out with a slight curve, like a shadow of the pucker on her brother’s brows, in her freckled forehead. She was ready to cry for joy when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> John appeared, just as she had cried for sorrow when the Barringtons went away. Neither of these effusions of sentiment would disturb her greatly, but they were quite genuine all the same. Rolls felt that the whiteness of her apron and the good-humour of her face lit up the seriousness of the house. He began to give her her instructions as he advanced across the open space at the top of the avenue. “Bauby,” he said, “when ye hear the wheels ye’ll come, and the lasses with you; and Andrew, he can stand behind; and me, naturally I’ll be in the front: and we’ll have no whingeing, if <i>you</i> please, but the best curtsey you can make, and ‘We’re glad to see you home, sir,’ or something cheery like that. He’s been long away, and he was but a boy when he went. We’ll have to take care that he gets a good impression of his ain house.”</p>
			<p>“That’s true,” said Bauby. “Tammas, I’ve heard of them that after a long absence have just taken a kind o’ scunner⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hold your tongue with your nonsense. A scunner at Dalrulzian!” cried Rolls; but the word sank into the depths of his heart. A scunner⁠—for we scorn a footnote⁠—is a sudden sickening and disgust with an object not necessarily disagreeable⁠—a sort of fantastic prejudice, which there is no struggling against. But Rolls repeated his directions, and would not allow himself to entertain such a fear.</p>
			<p>It was not, however, with any sound of wheels, triumphal or otherwise, that young Erskine approached his father’s house. It was all new and strange to him; the hills⁠—the broad and wealthy carses through which he had passed⁠—the noble Firth, half sea half river, which he had crossed over in his way⁠—all appeared to him like landscapes in a dream, places he had seen before, though he could not tell how or when. It was afternoon when he reached Dunearn, which was the nearest place of any importance. He had chosen to stop there instead of at the little country station a few miles farther on, which was proper for Dalrulzian. This caprice had moved him, much in the same way as a prince had sometimes been moved to wander about <i>incognito</i>, and glean the opinions of his public as to his own character and proceedings. Princes in fiction are fond of this diversion; why not a young Scotch laird just coming into his kingdom, whose person was quite unknown to his future vassals? It amused and gently excited him to think of thus arriving unknown, and finding out with what eyes he was looked upon: for he had very little doubt that he was important enough to be discussed and talked of, and that the opinions of the people would throw a great deal of light to him upon the circumstances and peculiarities of the place. He was curious about everything⁠—the little grey Scotch town, clinging to its hillside⁠—the freshness of the spring colour⁠—the width of the wistful blue sky, banked and flecked with white clouds, and never free, with all its brightness, from a suspicion of possible rain. He thought he recollected them all like things he had seen in a dream; and that sense of travelling <i>incognito</i> and arriving without any warning in the midst of a little world, all eagerly looking for his arrival, but which should be innocently deceived by his unpretending appearance, tickled his fancy greatly. He was five-and-twenty, and ought to have known better; but there was something in the circumstances which justified his excitement. He skimmed lightly along the quiet country road, saying to himself that he thought he remembered the few clusters of houses that were visible here and there, one of them only big enough to be called a village, where there was “a merchant’s” shop, repository of every kind of ware, and a blacksmith’s smithy. Two or three times he stopped to ask the way to Dalrulzian out of pure pleasure in the question! for he never lost sight of that line of fir-trees against the horizon, which indicated his native hill; but after he had put this question once or twice, it must be added that young Erskine’s satisfaction in it failed a little. He ceased to feel the excitement of his <i>incognito</i>, the pleasure of entering his dominions like a young prince in disguise. The imagination of the women at the village doors, the chance passengers on the way, were not occupied with the return of John Erskine; they were much more disposed to think and talk of the others who had no right, it seemed to him, to occupy their thoughts.</p>
			<p>“Dalrulzian! you’ll find nobody there the day,” said a countryman whom he overtook and accosted on the road. “The family’s away this morning, and a great loss they will be to the country-side.”</p>
			<p>“The family!” said John, and he felt that his tone was querulous in spite of himself. “I did not understand that there was a family.”</p>
			<p>“Ay was there, and one that will be missed sore; both gentle and simple will miss them. Not the real family, but as good, or maybe better,” the man said, with a little emphasis, as if he meant offence, and knew who his questioner was.</p>
			<p>The young man reddened in spite of himself. This was not the kind of popular report which in his <i>incognito</i> he had hoped to hear.</p>
			<p>“The laird is what they call in Ireland an absentee,” said his companion. “We’re no minding muckle in Scotland if they’re absentees or no; they can please themsels. But there’s nae family of the Erskines⁠—nothing but a young lad; and the Cornel that’s had the house was a fine, hearty, weel-spoken man, with a good word for everybody; and the ladies very kind, and pleasant, and neighbour-like. Young Erskine must be a young laird past the ordinar if he can fill their place.”</p>
			<p>“But, so far as I understand, the estate belongs to him, does it not?” Erskine asked, with an involuntary sharpness in his voice.</p>
			<p>“Oh ay, it belongs to him; that makes but sma’ difference. Ye’re no bound to be a fine fellow,” said the roadside philosopher, with great calmness, “because ye’re the laird of a bit sma’ country place⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is it such a small place?” cried the poor young prince <i>incognito</i>, appalled by this revelation. He felt almost childishly annoyed and mortified. His companion eyed him with a cool half-satirical gaze.</p>
			<p>“You’re maybe a friend of the young man? Na, I’m saying nae ill of the place nor of him. Dalrulzian’s a fine little property, and a’ in good order, thanks to auld Monypenny in Dunearn. Maybe you’re from Dunearn? It’s a place that thinks muckle of itself; but nae doubt it would seem but a poor bit town to you coming from the South?”</p>
			<p>“How do you know I come from the South?” said John.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I ken the cut of ye fine,” said the man. “I’m no easy deceived. And I daur to say you could tell us something about this new laird. There’s different opinions about him. Some thinks him a lad with brains, that could be put up for the county and spite the Earl. I’ve no great objection mysel to the Earl or his opinions, but to tak’ another man’s nominee, if he was an angel out of heaven, is little credit to an enlightened constituency. So there’s been twa-three words. You’ll no know if he has ony turn for politics, or if he’s a clever lad, or⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You don’t seem to mind what his politics are,” said the unwary young man.</p>
			<p>His new friend gave him another keen glance. “The Erskines,” he answered quietly, “are a’ on the right side.”</p>
			<p>Now John Erskine was aware that he did not himself possess political opinions sufficiently strenuous to be acknowledged by either side. He agreed sometimes with one party, sometimes with another, which, politically speaking, is the most untenable of all positions. And so ignorant was he of the immediate traditions of his family, that he could not divine which was “the right side” on which the Erskines were sure to be. It was not a question upon which his mother could have informed him. As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Kingsford’s wife, an orthodox Church of England clergywoman, she was, of course, soundly Conservative, and thought she hated everything that called itself Liberal⁠—which word she devoutly believed to include all kinds of Radical, revolutionary, and atheistical sentiments. John himself had been a good Tory too when he was at Eton, but at Oxford had veered considerably, running at one time into extreme opinions on the other side, then veering back, and finally settling into a hopeless eclectic, who by turns sympathised with everybody, but agreed wholly with nobody. Still it was whimsical not even to know the side on which the Erskines were declared with so much certainty to be. It pleased him at least to find that they had character enough to have traditionary politics at all.</p>
			<p>“You must excuse me as a stranger,” he said, “if I don’t quite know what side you regard as the⁠—right side.”</p>
			<p>His friend looked at him with a sarcastic gaze⁠—a look John felt which set him down not only as devoid of ordinary intelligence, but of common feeling. “It’s clear to see you are not of that way of thinking,” he said.</p>
			<p>As he uttered this contemptuous verdict they came opposite to a gate, guarded by a pretty thatched cottage which did duty for a lodge. John felt his heart give a jump, notwithstanding the abashed yet amused sensation with which he felt himself put down. It was the gate of Dalrulzian: he remembered it as if he had left it yesterday. A woman came to the gate and looked out, shielding her eyes with her hand from the level afternoon sun that shone into them. “Have you seen anything of our young master, John Tamson?” she said. “I’m aye thinking it’s him every sound I hear.”</p>
			<p>“There’s the road,” said the rural politician, briefly addressing John; then he turned to the woman at the gate. “If it’s no him, I reckon it’s a friend. Ye had better pit your questions here,” he said.</p>
			<p>“John Thomson,” said John, with some vague gleam of recollection. “Are you one of the farmers?” The man looked at him with angry, the woman with astonished, eyes.</p>
			<p>“My freend,” said John Thomson, indignantly, “I wouldna wonder but you have plenty of book-learning; but you’re an ignorant young fop for a’ that, if you were twenty times the laird’s freend.”</p>
			<p>John for his part was too much startled and amused to be angry. “Am I an ignorant young fop?” he said. “Well, it is possible⁠—but why in this particular case⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Noo, noo,” said the woman, who left the lodge, coming forward with her hands spread out, and a tone of anxious conciliation. “Dear bless me! what are you bickering about? He’s no a farmer, but he’s just as decent a man⁠—nobody better thought of for miles about. And, John Tamson, I’m astonished at you! Can you no let the young gentleman have his joke without taking offence like this, that was never meent?”</p>
			<p>“I like nae such jokes,” said John Tamson, angrily; and he went off swinging down the road at a great pace. John stood looking after him for a moment greatly perplexed. The man did not touch his hat nor the woman curtsey as they certainly would have done at Milton Magna. He passed her mechanically without thinking of her, and went in at his own gate⁠—not thinking of that either, though it was an event in his life. This little occurrence had given an impulse in another direction to his thoughts.</p>
			<p>But the woman of the lodge called after him. She had made a slightly surprised objection to his entrance, which he did not notice in his preoccupation. “Sir, sir!” she cried⁠—“you’re welcome to walk up the avenue, which is a bonnie walk; but you’ll find nobody in the house. The young laird, if it was him you was wanting to see, is expected every minute; but there’s no signs of him as yet⁠—and he canna come now till the four o’clock train.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you. I’ll walk up the avenue,” said John, and then he turned back. “Why did you think I was making a joke? and why was your friend offended when I asked if he was one of the farmers?⁠—it was no insult, I hope.”</p>
			<p>“He’s a very decent man, sir,” said the woman; “but I wouldna just take it upon me to say that he was my freend.”</p>
			<p>“That’s not the question!” cried John, exasperated⁠—and he felt some gibe about Scotch caution trembling on the tip of his tongue; but he remembered in time that he was himself a Scot and among his own people, and he held that unruly member still.</p>
			<p>“Weel, sir,” said the woman, “if ye will ken⁠—but, bless me! it’s easy to see for yourself. The farmers about here are just as well put on and mounted and a’ that as you are. John Tamson! he’s a very decent man, as good as any of them⁠—but he’s just the joiner after a’, and a cotter’s son. He thought you were making a fool of him, and he’s not a man to be made a fool o’. We’re no so civil-like⁠—nor may be so humble-minded, for anything I can tell⁠—as the English, sir. Baith the Cornel and his lady used to tell me that.”</p>
			<p>It was with a mixture of irritation and amusement that John pursued his way after this little encounter. And an uncomfortable sensation, a chill, seemed to creep over his mind, and arrest his pleasurable expectations as he went on. The avenue was not so fine a thing as its name implied. It was not lined with noble trees, nor did it sweep across a green universe of parks and lawns like many he had known. It led instead up the slope of the hill, through shrubberies which were not more than copsewood in some places, and under lightly arching trees not grand enough or thick enough to afford continuous shade. And yet it was sweet in the brightness of the spring tints, the half-clothed branches relieved against that variable yet smiling sky, the birds in full-throated chorus, singing welcome with a hundred voices⁠—no nightingales there, but whole tribes of the “mavis and the merle,” north-country birds and kindly. His heart and mind were touched alike with that half-pathetic pleasure, that mixture of vague recollections and forgetfulness, with which we meet the half-remembered faces, and put out our hands to meet the grasp of old friends still faithful though scarcely known. A shadow of the childish delight with which he had once explored these scanty yet fresh and friendly woods came breathing about him: “The winds came to me from the fields of sleep.” He felt himself like two people: one, a happy boy at home, familiar with every corner; the other a man, a spectator, sympathetically excited, faltering upon the forgotten way, wondering what lay round the next curve of the road. It was the strangest blending of the known and the unknown.</p>
			<p>But when John Erskine came suddenly, as he turned the corner of that great group of ash-trees, in sight of his house, these vague sensations, which were full of sweetness, came to an end with a sharp jar and shock of the real. Dalrulzian was a fact of the most solid dimensions, and dispersed in a moment all his dreams. He felt himself come down suddenly through the magical air, with a sensation of falling, with his feet upon the common soil. So that was his home! He felt in a moment that he remembered it perfectly⁠—that there had never been any illusions about it in his mind⁠—that he had known all along every line of it, every step of the gables, the number of the little windows, the slopes of the grey roof. But it is impossible to describe the keen sense of disenchantment which went through his mind as he said this to himself. It was not only that the solid reality dispersed his vision, but that it afforded a measure by which to judge himself and his fortunes, till now vaguely and pleasantly exaggerated in his eyes. It is seldom indeed that the dim image of what was great and splendid to us in our childhood does not seem ludicrously exaggerated when we compare it with the reality. He who had felt himself a young prince in disguise, approaching his domains <i>incognito</i>, in order to enjoy at his leisure the incense of universal interest, curiosity, and expectation! John Erskine blushed crimson though nobody saw him, as he stood alone at the corner of his own avenue and recognised the mistake he had made, and his own unimportance, and all the folly of his simple over-estimate. Fortunately, indeed, he had brought nobody with him to share in the glories of his entry upon his kingdom. He thanked heaven for that, with a gasp of horror at the thought of the crowning ridicule he had escaped. It was quite hard enough to get over the first startling sensation of reality alone.</p>
			<p>And yet it was the same house upon which the Barringtons had looked back so affectionately a few hours before⁠—which the county regarded with approval, and which was visited by the best families. It would be hard to say what its young master had expected⁠—a dream-castle, a habitation graceful and stately, a something built out of clouds, not out of old Scotch rubble-work and grey stone. It was not looking its best, it must be added. The <i>corps du logis</i> lay in gloom, thrown into shade by the projecting rustic gable, upon the other side of which the setting sun still played; the yellowish walls, discoloured here and there by damp, had no light upon them to throw a fictitious glow over their imperfections. The door stood open, showing the hall with its faded fittings, gloomy and unattractive, and, what was more, deserted, as if the house had been abandoned to dreariness and decay⁠—not so much as a dog to give some sign of life. When the young man, rousing himself with an effort, shook off the stupor of his disappointment and vexation, and went on to the open door, his foot on the gravel seemed to wake a hundred unaccustomed echoes: and nobody appeared. He walked in unchallenged, unwelcomed, going from room to room, finding all equally desolate. Was there ever a more dismal coming home? When he reached the library, where a little fire was burning, this token of human life quite went to the young fellow’s heart. He was standing on the hearth very gloomy, gazing wistfully at the portrait of a gentleman in a periwig over the mantelpiece, when the door was pushed open and old Rolls appeared with his coat off, carrying a basket of wood. Rolls was as much startled as his master was disappointed, and he was vexed to be seen by a stranger in so unworthy an occupation. He put down his basket and glanced at his shirt-sleeves with confusion. “I was expecting nobody,” he said in his own defence. “And wha may ye be,” he added, “that comes into the mansion-house of Dalrulzian without speering permission, or ringing a bell, or chapping at a door?” John smiled at the old man’s perplexity, but said nothing. “You’ll be a friend of our young master’s?” he said, tentatively; then after an interval, in a voice with a quiver in it, “Your no meaning, sir, that you’re the laird himself?”</p>
			<p>“For want of a better,” said John, amused in spite of himself. “And you’re old Rolls. I should have known you anywhere. Shake hands, man, and say you’re glad to see me. It’s like a house of the dead.”</p>
			<p>“Na, sir, no such things; there’s no death here. Lord bless us! wha was to think you would come in stealing like a thief in the night, as the Bible says?” said Rolls, aggrieved. He felt that it was he who was the injured person. “It was all settled how you were to be received as soon as the wheels were heard in the avenue⁠—me on the steps, and the women behind, and Andrew⁠—the haill household, to wit. If there’s any want of respect, it’s your ain fault. And if you’ll just go back to the avenue now and give us warning, I’ll cry up the women in a moment,” the old servant said.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
