<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXVII</h2>
			<p>The drive home would have been very embarrassing to the ladies had not Millefleurs been the perfect little gentleman he was. Rintoul, though he ought to have been aware that his presence was specially desirable, had abandoned his mother and sister; and the consciousness of the secret, which was no secret, weighed upon Lady Lindores so much, that it was scarcely possible for her to keep up any appearance of the easy indifference which was her proper <i>rôle</i> in the circumstances: while it silenced Edith altogether. They could scarcely look him in the face, knowing both the state of suspense in which he must be, and the false impression of Edith’s feelings which he was probably entertaining. Lady Lindores felt certain that he was aware she had been informed by her husband of what had passed, and feared to look at him lest he might, by some glance of intelligence, some look of appeal, call upon her sympathy; while on the other hand, it was all-essential to keep him, if possible, from noticing the pale consciousness of Edith, her silence and shrinking discomfort, so unlike her usual frank and friendly aspect. Millefleurs was far too quick-sighted not to observe this unusual embarrassment; but there was no more amiable young man in England, and it was his part for the moment to set them at their ease, and soothe the agitation which he could not but perceive. He talked of everything but the matter most near his heart with that self-sacrifice of true politeness which is perhaps the truest as it is one of the most difficult manifestations of social heroism. He took pains to be amusing, to show himself unconcerned and unexcited; and, as was natural, he got his reward. Lady Lindores was almost piqued (though it was so great a relief) that Edith’s suitor should be capable of such perfect calm; and Edith herself, though with a dim perception of the heroism in it, could not but console herself with the thought that one so completely self-controlled would “get over” his disappointment easily. Their conversation at last came to be almost a monologue on his part. He discoursed on Tinto and its treasures as an easy subject. “It has one great quality⁠—it is homogeneous,” he said, “which is too big a word for a small fellow like me. It is all of a piece, don’t you know. To think what lots of money those good people must have spent on those great vases, and candelabra, and things! We don’t do that sort of thing nowadays. We roam over all the world, and pick up our <i>bric-a-brac</i> cheap. But, don’t you know, there’s something fine in the other principle⁠—there’s a grand sort of spare-no-expense sentiment. I’d like to do it all over again for them⁠—to clear away all that finery, which is mere <i>Empire</i>, and get something really good, don’t you know. But at the same time, I respect this sort of thing. There is a thoroughness in it. It is going the ‘whole animal,’ as we say in America. Mr. Torrance, who is a fine big man, just like his house, should, if you’ll allow me to say so, have carried out the principle a little further; he should not have gone so entirely into a different <i>genre</i> in his wife.”</p>
			<p>“You mean that Carry is⁠—that Carry looks⁠—⁠She is not very strong,” said Lady Lindores, with involuntary quickening of attention, taking up instantly an attitude of defence.</p>
			<p>“Dear Lady Lindores,” cried little Millefleurs, “entirely out of keeping! A different <i>genre</i> altogether; a different date⁠—the finest ethical nineteenth century against a background <i>Empire</i>! preposterous altogether. We have no style to speak of in china, or that sort of thing⁠—which is odd, considering how much we think of it. We can’t do anything better than go back to Queen Anne for our furniture. But in respect to women, it’s quite different. We’ve got a Victorian type in that, don’t you know. I am aware that it is the height of impertinence to make remarks. But considering the family friendship to which you have been so good as to admit me, and my high appreciation⁠—Lady Caroline, if you will allow me to say so, is a different <i>genre</i>. She is out of keeping with the decoration of her house.”</p>
			<p>“Poor Carry!” Lady Lindores said with a sigh; and they were thankful to Millefleurs when he ran on about the china and the gilding. It was he, with those keen little beady eyes of his, who saw John Erskine disappearing among the trees. He had possession of the stage, as it were, during all that long way home, which to the ladies seemed about twice as long as it had ever been before.</p>
			<p>Lord Lindores had not accompanied the party. He did not come in contact with his son-in-law, indeed, any more than he could help. Though he had taken up Tinto so warmly at first, it was not to be supposed that a man of his refinement could have any pleasure in such society; and though he made a point of keeping on scrupulously good terms with Torrance, even when the latter set himself in opposition to the Earl’s plans, yet he kept away from the spectacle afforded by his daughter and her husband in their own house. If Lord Lindores’s private sentiments could have been divined, it would probably have been apparent that in his soul he thought it hard upon poor Caroline to have married such a man. There were reasons which made it very desirable, even necessary; but it was a pity, he felt. In the present case, however, there was nothing but congratulations to be thought of. Edith was, there could be no doubt, a thoroughly fortunate young woman. Nobody could say a word against Millefleurs. He had shown himself eccentric, but only in a way quite approved by his generation; and there was no doubt that a wife, at once pretty and charming, and sufficiently clever, was all that he wanted to settle him. Not Carry⁠—Carry was too intellectual, too superior altogether, for the democratic little Marquis; but Edith had just the combination of simplicity and mental competence that would suit his position. It was the most admirable arrangement that could have been devised. Lord Lindores sat in his library with much satisfaction of mind, and thought over all the new combinations. He had no doubt of the Duke’s content with the alliance⁠—and through the Duke, the whole Ministry would be affected. It would be felt that to keep a man of Lord Lindores’s abilities in the hopeless position of a mere Scotch lord, would be a waste prejudicial to the country. With Millefleurs for his son-in-law, a mere representative seat in the House of Lords no longer seemed worth his while⁠—an English peerage would be his as a matter of course. He had said a few words to Rintoul on the subject before the party left the house. There could be no harm in drawing the bonds tighter which were to produce so admirable an effect. “There is Lady Reseda, a very charming girl,” he said. “It is time you were thinking of marrying, Rintoul. I don’t know any girl that has been more admired.”</p>
			<p>“One doesn’t care for one’s wife having been admired,” said Rintoul, somewhat sulkily. “One would rather admire her one’s self.”</p>
			<p>His father looked at him with some severity, and Rintoul coloured in spite of himself. Perhaps this was one reason why his temper was so unpleasant at Tinto, and moved him to fling off from the party in the midst of their inspection of the place, and declare that he would walk home. In his present temper, perhaps he would not have been much help to them, whereas Millefleurs managed it all capitally, being left to himself.</p>
			<p>They got home only in time to dress for dinner, at which meal Rintoul did not appear. It was unlike him to stay behind and dine at Tinto; but still there was nothing impossible in it, and the minds of the four people who sat down together at table were all too much absorbed by the immediate question before them to have much time to consider Rintoul. Lady Lindores’s entire attention was given to Edith, who, very pale and with a thrill of nervous trembling in her, which her mother noted without quite understanding, neither ate nor talked, but pretended, at least, to do the first, veiling herself from the eyes of her lover behind the flowers which ornamented the centre of the table. These flowers, it must be allowed, are often a nuisance and serious hindering of conversation. On this occasion they performed a charitable office. There was one plume of ferns in particular which did Edith the most excellent service. She had been commanded to repair to the library when she left the table, to await her father there. And if she trembled, it was with the tension of high-strung nerves, not the hesitation of weakness, as her mother thought. Lord Lindores, for his part, watched her too, with an uneasy instinct. He would not allow himself to imagine that she could have the folly to hesitate even; and yet there was a sensation in him, an unwilling conviction that, if Edith resisted, she would be, though she was not so clever, a different kind of antagonist from poor Carry. There arose in him, as he glanced at her now and then, an impulse of war. He had no idea that she would really attempt to resist him: but if she did! He, too, had little to say during dinner. He uttered a formal sentence now and then in discharge of his duty as host, but that was all; and by intervals, when he had leisure to think of it, he was angry with his son. Rintoul ought to have been there to take the weight of the conversation upon him: Rintoul ought to have had more discrimination than to choose this day of all others for absenting himself. His mother was of the same opinion. She, too, was almost wroth with Rintoul⁠—to leave her unsupported without any aid at such a crisis was unpardonable. But Millefleurs was quite equal to the emergency. He took everything upon himself. The servants, closest of all critics, did not even guess that anything was going on in which “the wee English lord” was involved. They made their own remarks upon Lady Edith’s pallor and silence, and the preoccupation of Lady Lindores. But Millefleurs was the life of the company; and not even the butler, who had seen a great deal in his day, and divined most things, associated him with the present evident crisis. It was amazing how much he found to say, and how naturally he said it, as if nothing particular was going on, and no issues of any importance to him, at least, were involved.</p>
			<p>When the ladies left the table, Lady Lindores would have detained her daughter with her. “Come into the drawing-room with me first, Edith. Your father cannot be ready for you for some minutes at least.”</p>
			<p>“No, mamma. I must keep all my wits about me,” Edith said, with a faint smile. They were in the corridor, where it was always cold, and she shivered a little in spite of herself.</p>
			<p>“You are chilly, Edith⁠—you are not well, dear. I will go myself and tell your father you are not able to talk to him to-night.”</p>
			<p>Edith shook her head without saying anything. She waved her hand to her mother as she turned away in the direction of the library. Lady Lindores stood looking after her with that strange struggle in her mind which only parents know⁠—the impulse to take their children in their arms as of old, and bear their burdens for them, contradicted by the consciousness that this cannot be done⁠—that the time has come when these beloved children can no longer be carried over their difficulties, but must stand for themselves, with not another to interfere between them and fate. Oh the surprise of this penetrating the heart! Lady Lindores went back to the drawing-room with the wonder and pain of it piercing her like an arrow, to sit down and wait while Edith⁠—little Edith⁠—bore her trial alone. It was intolerable, yet it had to be endured. She stood aside and let her child do what had to be done; any trial in the world would have been easier. The pang was complicated in every way. There seemed even an ingratitude in it, as if her child preferred to stand alone; and yet it was all inevitable⁠—a thing that must be. She waited, the air all rustling round her, with expectation and suspense. What would the girl find to say? Caroline had wept and struggled, but she had yielded. Edith would not weep, she would stand fast like a little rock; but, after all, what was there to object to? Millefleurs was very different from Torrance of Tinto. Why should he not please the girl’s fancy as well as another? He had so much in him to please any girl’s fancy; he was clever and amusing, and romantic even in his way. If Edith would but content herself with him! True, he was little; but what did that matter after all? He would no doubt make the best of husbands⁠—unquestionably he would make the best of sons-in-law. And then, your mind must be impartial indeed if you are impervious to the attractions of an English dukedom. Who could be indifferent to that? With a little laugh of nervous pleasure, Lady Lindores permitted herself to think how amusing it would be to see her little girl take precedence of her. Alas! things were far from being so advanced as that; but yet she could not help more or less being on the side of ambition this time. The ambition that fixed upon Torrance of Tinto was poor enough, and shamed her to think of it; but the Marquis Millefleurs, the Duke of Lavender, that was an ambition which had some justification. Not love him! Why should not she love him? Lady Lindores even went so far as to ask herself with some heat. He was delightful; everything but his stature was in his favour. He was excellent; his very failings leant to virtue’s side.</p>
			<p>While, however, her mother was thus discussing the question with so strong a bias in favour of Millefleurs, Edith was standing in her father’s library waiting for him, not entering into any argument with herself at all. She would not sit down, which would have seemed somehow like yielding, but stood with her hand upon the mantelpiece, her heart beating loudly. She had not summoned herself to the bar of her own judgment, or asked with any authority how it was that she neither could nor would for a moment take the qualities of Millefleurs into consideration. The question had been given against him before even it was put; but Edith would not allow herself to consider why. No doubt she knew why; but there are occasions in which we do not wish to see what is going on in our spirits, just as there are occasions when we turn out all the corners and summon everything to the light. She heard the door of the dining-room open, then the voices of the gentlemen as they came out, with a sudden tightening of her breath. What if little Millefleurs himself were coming instead of her father? This idea brought a gleam of a smile over her face; but that was driven away as she heard the heavy familiar step approaching. Lord Lindores, as he came along the corridor, had time enough to say to himself that perhaps he had been foolish. Why had he determined upon speaking to Edith before he allowed her lover to speak to her? Perhaps it was a mistake. He had his reasons, but it might be that they were not so powerful as he had supposed, and that he would have done better not to have interfered. However, it was now too late to think of this. He went into the library, shutting the door deliberately, asking himself why he should have any trouble about the matter, and what Edith could feel but happiness in having such a proposal made to her; but when he turned round and met Edith’s eye his delusions fled. Surely there was nobody so unfortunate as he was in his children. Instead of their perceiving what was for their own interest, he was met by a perpetual struggle and attempt to put him in the wrong. It was inconceivable. Was it not their interest solely which moved him? and yet they would resist as if he were plotting nothing but wrong. But though these thoughts passed through his mind with a sweep of bitterness, he would not indulge them. He went up to Edith with great urbanity, putting down all feelings less pleasant. “I am glad to find you here,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Yes, papa; you wanted me, my mother told me.”</p>
			<p>“I wanted you. As I came along the corridor, I began to ask myself whether I was doing right in wanting you. Perhaps I ought to have let you hear what I am going to say from⁠—some one who might have made it more agreeable, Edith.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, let me hear what you want, please, from yourself, papa.”</p>
			<p>He took her hand, which trembled in his hold, and looked down on her with fatherly eyes⁠—eyes which were tender, and admiring, and kind. Could any one doubt that he wished her well? He wished her everything that was best in the world⁠—wealth and title, and rank and importance⁠—everything we desire for our children. He was not a bad man, desiring the sacrifice of his child’s happiness. If he had, perhaps, made something of a mistake about Carry, there was no mistake here.</p>
			<p>“Edith, I want to speak to you about Lord Millefleurs. He came here, I believe, on your own invitation⁠—”</p>
			<p>At this Edith started with sudden alarm, and her hand trembled still more in her father’s easy clasp. She had an indefinite pang of fear, she could not tell why.</p>
			<p>“He has been here now for some time. I was glad to ratify your invitation by mine⁠—nothing could have pleased me better. I like his family. His father and I have always thought alike, and the Duchess is a most excellent woman. That your mother and you should have taken him up so much, was very good for him, and quite a pleasure to me.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know why you should say we took him up very much,” said Edith, with some confusion. “He took us up⁠—he came to us wherever we were. And then he was Robin’s friend. It was quite natural⁠—there was nothing⁠—” She paused, with a painful eagerness to excuse herself: and yet there was nothing to excuse. This changed the position for the moment, and made everything much more easy for the indulgent father, who was so ready to approve what his child herself had done.</p>
			<p>“It is perfectly natural, my dear⁠—everything about it is natural. Lord Millefleurs has been quite consistent since he first saw you. He has explained himself to me in the most honourable way. He wishes⁠—to marry you, Edith. I don’t suppose this is any surprise to you?”</p>
			<p>Edith was crimson; her temples throbbed with the rush of the blood, which seemed to rise like an angry sea. “If it is so, he has had opportunity enough to tell me so. Why has he taken so unfair an advantage? Why⁠—why has he gone to you?”</p>
			<p>“He has behaved like an honourable man. I see no unfair advantage. He has done what was right⁠—what was respectful at once to you and to me.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, papa⁠—honourable! respectful!” cried the girl. “What does that mean in our position? Could he have been anything but honourable⁠—to me? You forget what kind of expressions you are using. If he had <i>that</i> to say, it is to me he ought to have come. He has taken an unkind⁠—a cruel advantage!” Edith cried.</p>
			<p>“This is ridiculous,” said her father. “He has done what it is seemly and right to do⁠—in his position and yours. If he had gone to you, as you say, like a village lad to his lass, what advantage could there have been in that? As it is, you have your father’s full sanction, which, I hope, you reckon for something, Edith.”</p>
			<p>“Father,” she said, somewhat breathless, collecting herself with a little effort. The wave of hot colour died off from her face. She grew paler and paler as she stood firmly opposite to him, holding fast with her hand the cool marble of the mantelpiece, which felt like a support. “Father, if he had come to me, as he ought to have done, this is what would have happened⁠—I should have told him at once that it was a mistake, and he would have left us quietly without giving you any trouble. How much better that would have been in every way!”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand you, Edith. A mistake? I don’t see that there is any mistake.”</p>
			<p>“That is very likely, papa,” she said, with returning spirit, “since it is not you that are concerned. But I see it. I should have told him quietly, and there would have been an end of the matter, if he had not been so formal, so absurd⁠—so old-fashioned⁠—as to appeal to you.”</p>
			<p>This counterblast took away Lord Lindores’s breath. He made a pause for a moment, and stared at her; he had never been so treated before. “Old-fashioned,” he repeated, almost with bewilderment. “There is enough of this, Edith. If you wish to take up the <i>rôle</i> of the advanced young lady, I must tell you it is not either suitable or becoming. Millefleurs will, no doubt, find an early opportunity of making his own explanations to you, and of course, if you choose to keep him in hot water, it is, I suppose, your right. But don’t carry it too far. The connection is one that is perfectly desirable⁠—excellent in every point of view.”</p>
			<p>“It is a pity, since you think so, that it is impossible,” she said in a low tone.</p>
			<p>Lord Lindores looked at her, fixing her with his eye. He felt now that he had known it all along⁠—that he had felt sure there was a struggle before him, and that his only policy was to convince her that he was determined from the very first. “There is nothing impossible,” he said, “except disobedience and folly. I don’t expect these from you. Indeed I can’t imagine what motive you can have, except a momentary perverseness, to answer me so. No more of it, Edith. By to-morrow, at least, everything will be settled between you and your lover⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, papa, listen! don’t mistake me,” she cried. “He is not my lover. How can you⁠—how can you use such a word? He can never be anything to me. If he had spoken to me, I could have settled it all in a moment. As it is you he has spoken to, why give him a double mortification? It will be so easy for you to tell him: to tell him⁠—he can never be anything to me.”</p>
			<p>“Edith, take care what you are saying! He is to be your husband. I am not a man easily balked in my own family.”</p>
			<p>“We all know that,” she cried, with bitterness; “but I am not Carry, papa.”</p>
			<p>He made a step nearer to her, with a threatening aspect. “What do you mean by that? Carry! What has Carry to do with it? You have a chance poor Carry never had⁠—high rank, wealth⁠—everything that is desirable: and a man whom the most fantastic could not object in any way to.”</p>
			<p>There is scarcely any situation in the world into which a gleam of ridicule will not fall. It takes us with the tear in our eye⁠—it took Edith in the nervous excitement of this struggle, the most trying moment which personally she had ever gone through. Millefleurs, with his little plump person, his round eyes, his soft lisp of a voice, seemed to come suddenly before her, and at the height of this half-tragical contention she laughed. It was excitement and high pressure as well as that sudden flash of perverse imagination. She could have cried next moment⁠—but laugh she did, in spite of herself. The sound drove Lord Lindores to fury. “This is beyond bearing,” he cried. “It seems that I have been deceived in you altogether. If you cannot feel the honour that has been done you⁠—the compliment that has been paid you⁠—you are unworthy of it, and of the trouble I have taken.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose,” said Edith, irritated too, “these are the right words for a girl to use to any man who is so good as to think she would suit him. I was wrong to laugh, but are not you going too far, papa? I am likely to get more annoyance by it than honour. Please, please let me take my own way.”</p>
			<p>She had broken down a little when she said this, in natural reaction, and gave him a pitiful look, with a little quiver of her lip. After such a laugh it is so likely that a girl will cry, as after a sudden self-assertion it is to be expected that she will be subdued and humbled. She looked at him with a childlike appeal for pity. And he thought that now he had her securely in his hands.</p>
			<p>“My love,” he said, “you will regret it all your life if I yield to you now. It is your happiness I am thinking of. I cannot let a girl’s folly spoil your career. Besides, it is of the highest importance to everybody⁠—to Rintoul, even to myself⁠—that you should marry Millefleurs⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry, papa; but I shall never⁠—marry Lord Millefleurs⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Folly! I shall not allow you to trifle with him, Edith⁠—or with me. You have given him the most evident encouragement⁠—led him on in every way, invited him here⁠—”</p>
			<p>Edith grew pale to her very lips. “Papa, have pity on me! I never did so; it was all nothing⁠—the way one talks without meaning it⁠—without thinking⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is all very well on our side, but on the other⁠—⁠I tell you, I will permit no trifling, Edith. He has a right to a favourable answer, and he must have it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Never, never! if I have been wrong, I will ask his pardon⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You will accept him in the first place,” said Lord Lindores, sternly.</p>
			<p>“I will never accept him,” Edith said.</p>
			<p>Her father, wound up to that pitch of excitement at which a man is no longer master of what he says, took a few steps about the room. “Your sister said the same,” he cried, with a short laugh, “and you know what came of that.”</p>
			<p>It was an admission he had never intended to make⁠—for he did not always feel proud of his handiwork⁠—but it was done now, and could not be recalled. Edith withdrew even from the mantelpiece on which she had leant. She clasped her hands together, supporting herself. “I am not Carry,” she said, in a low tone, facing him resolutely as he turned back in some alarm at what he had been betrayed into saying. He had become excited, and she calm. He almost threatened her with his hand in the heat of the moment.</p>
			<p>“You will obey your parents,” he cried.</p>
			<p>“No, papa,” she said.</p>
			<p>He remembered so well, too well, what Carry had done in the same circumstances⁠—she had wept and pleaded. When he demanded obedience from her she had not dared to stand against him. He recollected (too well for his own comfort sometimes) every one of those scenes which brought her to submission. But Edith did not weep, and was not shaken by that final appeal. She was very pale, and looked unusually slight and young and childlike standing there with her hands clasped, her steadfast eyes raised, her little mouth close⁠—so slight a thing, not stately like Carry. He was confounded by a resistance which he had not foreseen, which he could not have believed in, and stood staring at her, not knowing what next to say and do. Matters were at this point when all at once there arose a something outside the room, which not even the solid closed doors and heavy curtains could keep out⁠—not positive noise or tumult, but something indescribable⁠—a sensation as of some unknown dread event. Ordinarily all was still in the well-ordered house, and my lord’s tranquillity as completely assured as if he had been Prime Minister. But this was something that was beyond decorum. Then the door was hastily opened, and Rintoul ghastly, his face grey rather than pale, his hair hanging wildly on his forehead, came into the room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
